ST.  THOMAS,  July  17th,  1853. — We  arrived  here, 
my  dear  Father,  this  morning,  after  a  prosperous  and 
pleasant  voyage  of  fifteen  days.  I  can  scarcely  persuade myself  yet  that  the  past  fortnight  is  not  a 
dream  ;  that  I  really  am  in  another  hemisphere,  and 
another  clime ;  that  the  view  I  am  now  contemplating 
of  this  beautiful  island,  its  deep  blue  sky  and  tropical 
vegetation,  will  not  dissolve  itself  into  the  Apsley 
gardens  and  the  statue  of  Achilles,  or  some  equally 
familiar  home  scene.  However,  assuming  that  I  am 
awake,  I  will,  according  to  promise,  note  down  for 
your  amusement  (I  hope)  during  your  few  hours  of 
leisure,  all  my  doings  and  adventures  in  their  due 
course.  The  first  few  days  after  leaving  Southampton  were  chiefly  occupied  in  "  fixing  "  ourselves, 
and  making  acquaintance  one  with  another,  neither 
of  which  was  attended  with  much  difficulty,  as  fortunately neither  Eleanor  nor  I  have  suffered  at  all  from 
sea-sickness.  On  the  seventh  day  we  sighted  the 
Azores,  especially  the  island  of  St.  Michael,  and  were 
able  just  faintly  to  discern  the  Peak  of  Pico.  I  was 
sorry  not  to  be  allowed  to  land ;  but  the  rules  of  the 
packet  service  forbid  touching  anywhere  on  the  way, 
except  in  a  case  of  necessity.  We  have  had  the 
advantage  of  two  captains  during  the  voyage,  as, 
besides  Captain  Woolley,  who  commands  our  beautiful Parana,  we  are  accompanied  by  Captain  Abbott, 
who  joins  his  own  ship,  which  has  been  out  here 
under  repair.  Our  fellow-passengers  have  been 
mostly  agreeable  and  kindly-disposed  people,  gathered 
indeed  from  many  different  nations.  We  formed  a 
miniature  Babel  between  us  in  point  of  tongues  ;  but 
luckily  there  was  neither  quarrel  nor  disagreement, 
and  I  believe  we  shall  all  part  and  go  on  our  respective ways  now  with  mutual  regret.  I  must  not  for- 
get to  tell  you  that  I  have  been  persuaded  by  two  or 
three  experienced  travellers  in  these  countries,  to 
change  the  route  I  had  originally  intended  to  take, 
and  instead  of  paying  my  visit  at  Barbados  now,  and 
proceeding  to  America  later  in  the  season,  I  propose 
going  at  once  to  Havana,  thence  make  a  short  tour  in 
the  United  States,  and  return  south  to  Barbados  in 
October  or  November.  There  is  some  risk,  I  am 
told,  of  being  snowed  up  and  detained  for  months  in 
America  when  travelling  so  late  in  the  year.  .  .  . 
Finding  that  the  Clyde  (the  steamer  bound  for 
Havana)  does  not  sail  till  to-morrow  at  mid-day,  we 
went  on  shore  this  morning,  and  took  a  drive  about 
the  town  and  environs,  a  friend  of  Captain  Abbott's 
having  good-naturedly  organised  a  carriage  and  pair 
of  horses  to  be  in  readiness  for  us.  The  yellow  fever 
is  still  raging  in  St.  Thomas,  I  am  sorry  to  hear, 
though  its  violence  has  much  abated'  during  the  last 
few  weeks.  It  is  now  chiefly  confined  to  the  ships  in 
the  harbour,  especially  that  part  where  the  coaling 
takes  place ;  but  both  town  and  land  are  now  comparatively free  from  the  scourge.  It  is  singular, 
however,  that  no  one  speaks  of  it  as  a  thing  they 
feared  in  the  least  degree.  A  row  of  about  ten 
minutes  brought  us  to  the  shore,  and  for  the  first  time 
I  trod  not  on  European  ground.  St.  Thomas  is  not 
generally  named  ad  a  favourable  specimen  of  a  tropical 
climate ;  but  it  is  so  new  to  me,  and  the  change  is  in 
every  respect  so  complete  from  all  we  left  on  the 
other  side  of  the  Atlantic,  as  to  be  sufficient  to  please 
by  its  novelty  alone.  What  richness  of  colour  pervades everything, — land,  sea  and  sky  seem  to  vie  with 
each  other  in  depth  and  gorgeousness  of  hue.  At  the 
risk  of  horrifying  and  displeasing  my  compatriots,  for 
good  and  all,  I  must  aver  that  I  never  knew  before
what  real  green  trees  and  green  grass  were.  One  peculiarity of  the  vegetation  here  I  cannot  understand, 
namely,  that  with  a  tropical  sun  absolutely  blazing 
all  day,  and  with  pretty  nearly  equal  violence  throughout the  year,  yet  nothing  seems  burnt ;  leaves,  trees, 
and  plants  look  as  fresh  as  spring.  Now  in  England 
or  France,  or  any  temperate  climate,  a  fortnight 
uninterrupted  summer  sunshine  is  enough  to  burn, 
dry  up,  and  change  the  colour  of  everything;  in 
short,  the  glory  of  the  summer  would  have  departed. 
I  suppose  there  must  be  some  way  of  accounting  for 
this  singularity,  but  for  my  part,  I  must  apply  to 
some  wiser  head  than  my  own  to  elucidate  it.  There 
are  palm  trees  in  abundance  here,  the  principal  features in  all  my  beau-ideal  landscapes.  I  observed 
in  the  course  of  our  drive,  the  banyan,  tamarind, 
and  mango,  hitherto  only  known  at  home  in  our  hothouses. I  admire  the  tamarind  leaf  exceedingly ;  it 
is  so  graceful.  Also  I  must  not  omit  mentioning  my 
introduction  to  a  sugar  plantation,  which,  however, 
did  not  make  so  pleasing  an  impression  as  other  new 
arborical  acquaintances.  They  (the  sugar  canes) 
look  like  a  forest  of  rushes  ;  but  the  people  here  tell 
me  I  should  wait  to  see  them  in  flower  before  pronouncing the  fiat  of  "  ugly  "  upon  them.  En  revanche 
I  may  be  permitted  irrevocably  so  to  designate  the 
inhabitants,  i.  e.  the  black  people.  I  could  scarcely 
have  imagined  anything  so  hideous  as  a  black  baby, 
and  I  don't  know  which  was  worst,  one  I  saw  about 
six  months  old,  in  white  swaddling  clothes,  or  another 
just  able  to  toddle  alone,  and  who,  instead  of  being 
a  rosy,  dimpled  little  cherub,  as  might  be  expected, 
was  as  black  as  ink,  and,  moreover,  stark  naked. 
With  the  grown-up  female  population,  however,  deficiency of  dress  cannot  be  complained  of;  every 
colour  in  the  rainbow  is  pressed  into  the  service, 
and  generally  at  the  same  time — the  more  the  better 
they  seem  to  think ;  yellow,  sky-blue  and  pink  seem 
the  fashionable  tints,  and  dresses  are  generally  worn 
flounced  up  to  the  waist.  Neither  shoes  nor  stockings are  usually  worn,  except  on  Sundays  to  go  to 
church,  and  then  the  former  are  of  white  satin !  I 
was  nearly  forgetting  to  chronicle  almost  the  only  remarkable curiosity  belonging  to  this  island,  namely, 
a  gigantic  cotton  tree.  I  am  afraid  to  trust  my 
memory  as  to  its  age  or  size,  though  both  were  told 
me,  but  its  proportions  are  most  colossal,  and  the 
shapes  assumed  by  its  gnarled  and  twisted  branches 
are  most  extraordinary.  The  tree,  altogether,  would 
form,  in  the  outline,  a  very  good  representation  of 
the  Laocoon  magnified  a  hundred  times.  .  .  . 
The  time  had  now  come  to  bid  farewell  to  the  Parana 
and  our  ocean  friends,  which  we  did  with  real  regret. 
A  long  voyage  makes  one  become  quite  attached 
even  to  inanimate  things  :  I  was  really  grieved  to 
quit  my  little  cabin.  There  are  only  four  of  our  old
companions  going  on  with  us  to  Havana,  the  rest  are 
to  scatter  themselves  far  and  wide  in  every  direction. 
St.  Thomas  is  the  central  spot  whence  radiate  all 
routes  to  other  parts  of  the  western  hemisphere. 
The  Clyde  seems  quite  a  nutshell  after  the  Parana. 
She  is  commanded  by  Captain  Wilson,  a  son  of  the 
Bishop  of  Calcutta.  I  shall  close  my  letter  now,  as 
the  mail  starts  for  England  very  early  to-morrow 
morning. — Ever  your  affectionate, 

C.