MY  DEAR  FATHER, — At  an  early  hour  of  the  morning 
after  our  arrival  at  Kingston  we  commenced  our  voyage down  the  river  St.  Lawrence.  In  about  a  couple 
of  hours  we  came  to  the  "Thousand  Isles,"  a 
numerous  group  so  called,  among  which  we  threaded 
our  way  for  some  time.  These  islets  are  very  celebrated for  their  beauty,  though,  individually,  I 
should  call  them  more  curious  than  picturesque; 
moreover,  some  of  them  are  really  too  small  to  be 
dignified  by  the  name  of  islands,  being  merely  little 
beds  of  earth.  Indeed,  the  whole  collection  conveys 
the  idea  of  having  once  been  a  good-sized  piece  of 
land,  now  broken  into  a  number  of  small  portions 
and  tossed  into  the  water.  The  surrounding  scenery 
on  the  green  banks  of  the  St.  Lawrence  is,  however, 
very  pleasant  to  look  upon.  The  navigation  of  the 
rapids,  a  little  below  the  "  Thousand  Isles,"  now  engaged our  attention.  They  are  very  dangerous,  and 
require,  even  in  a  steam-boat,  most  careful  management. The  river  rushes  along  most  furiously,  and  all 
around,  in  most  unpleasant  propinquity,  rise  huge 
rocks,  threatening  destruction  to  all  who  approach 
them,  and  against  any  one  of  which,  had  we  struck, 
we  must  have  gone  to  pieces  and  probably  perished  in 
a  moment.  We  fortunately,  however,  had  a  steady 
and  skilful  commander,  and  in  due  time  we  were 
clear  of  all  difficulties.  Near  these  rapids,  by  the 
bye,  is  laid  the  scene  of  the  famous  Canadian  boatsong,  "  Eow,  brothers,  row."  The  singers  were  in 
ancient  days  the  fur  traders  of  Montreal,  who  were  in 
the  habit  of  ascending  the  Ottawa  Eiver,  which  is 
just  above  these  rapids,  to  sell  their  goods  to  the  Indians. They  used  to  stop  at  a  church  on  an  island 
dedicated  to  Saint  Ann,  their  tutelary  saint,  and  offer 
their  orisons  to  her :  hence  the  allusion  you  will 
remember  in  the  song :  "  We'll  raise  to  St.  Ann,"  &c. 
A  pleasant  sail  for  two  or  three  hours  more  brought 
us  to  Montreal,  the  first  impression  of  which  is  most 
agreeable.  I  was  quite  rejoiced  to  see  the  English 
flag  flying  once  more.  Not  that  it  can  be  compared 
in  point  of  beauty  to  the  stars  and  stripes ;  still  it  is 
more  comfortable  to  see  the  English  flag  where  you 
hear  the  English  tongue.  Having  established  ourselves in  the  best  quarters  we  could  find  at  Done- 
gana's  Hotel,  Montreal  being  at  present  very  crowded, 
we  proceeded  to  employ  the  remaining  hour  or  two 
of  daylight  in  reconnoitring  the  town  and  neighbourhood. The  scenery  I  find  remarkably  pretty,  and, 
moreover,  the  city  has  an  air  of  comfort,  and  to  a  certain extent  of  antiquity,  rarely  to  be  seen  in  the  States. 
We  drove  for  a  short  distance  along  the  base  of  the 
Montreal  Mountain,  as  it  is  called  par  excellence,  and 
then  made  the  ascent.  The  view  from  its  summit 
is  most  picturesque, — green  undulating  land  dotted 
with  country  houses  and  cottages,  with  beautiful  gardens and  trees.  This  morning  we  visited  the  Cathedral, and  one  or  two  other  churches,  but  they  are  in 
nowise  remarkable,  at  least  they  look  paltry  after  the 
splendour  of  the  Catholic  churches  in  Europe.  The 
scene  of  the  terrible  fire  which  occurred  here  three 
years  ago  was  pointed  out  to  us.  It  has  fearfully  devastated a  great  part  of  the  town.  It  seems  difficult 
to  understand  how  such  a  fire  could  have  lasted  so 
long  a  time  and  have  done  so  much  mischief,  as  the 
houses  were  not  built  of  wood,  which  I  had  always 
imagined  to  be  the  case  ;  yet  the  flames  raged  and 
raged  on  in  spite  of  every  effort,  and  for  some  time 
burst  forth  again  and  .again,  notwithstanding  several 
houses  being  blown  up  in  order  to  create  a  blank 
space  and  check  the  progress  of  the  conflagration. 
We  went  also  to  visit  a  convent  belonging  to  the 
order  of  Les  Sceurs  Grises.  There  are,  I  believe,  a 
great  number  of  religious  houses  of  this  description 
in  Montreal.  These  sisters  do  much  good  in  the 
town,  attending  the  sick,  comforting  the  unhappy, 
and  besides  they  take  a  number  of  children,  orphans, 
foundlings,  and  others,  whom  they  feed,  clothe,  and 
educate.  We  visited  the  various  rooms  and  saw  the 
children  at  their  different  occupations.  They  all 
looked  both  healthy  and  happy.  Having  seen  all 
that  was  worthy  of  especial  note  down  below,  including a  most  beautiful  and  wonderful  garden,  belonging to  a  Montreal  merchant,  whose  name  I  forget, 
but  who  has  collected  here  everything  which  is  rich 
and  rare,  in  shrub  or  flower,  we  proceeded  to  drive 
up  the  Mountain  again,  to  see  what  used  to  be  the 
governor  of  Canada's  country  residence,  but  which  is 
now  turned  into  a  sort  of  cafe  where  you  eat  ices, 
lunch,  &c.  The  house  is  handsome,  and  the  view  all 
round  exceedingly  fine.  Lord  Elgin  used  to  stay 
here  a  good  deal,  but  since  the  riots  which  took  place 
some  time  ago,  on  the  subject  of  the  Eebels  Indemnity Bill,  as  I  think  it  was  called,  the  seat  of  government has  been  transferred  to  Quebec ;  and  although 
Lord  E.  has  been  repeatedly  entreated  to  return  to 
Montreal,  he  has  refused.  I  hear  they  treated 
him  with  great  indignity  and  acted  very  disgracefully. Our  driver  gave  us  a  very  amusing  account of  the  proceedings  on  that  memorable  day. 
From  an  early  hour  in  the  morning  every  one  who 
possessed  any  eggs  was  waylaid,  and  their'eggs  bought 
for  whatever  they  chose  to  ask,  but  if  they  refused  to 
sell  they  were  taken  from  them  by  force ;  and  thus 
armed  they  awaited  Lord  Elgin's  sortie,  when  immediately  he  appeared  the  signal  was  given,  and  from 
far  and  near,  from  right  and  left,  from  above  and  below, came  the  shower  of  eggs.  Though  rather  ludicrous, after  all  it  was  excessively  insulting,  and  I 
don't  wonder  at  his  refusal  to  take  up  his  abode  with 
such  hosts.  '  The  grievance  complained  of  was,  that 
by  this  obnoxious  bill  the  innocent  and  loyal  subjects 
who  had  made  no  disturbance  were  taxed,  or  in  some 
way  made  to  pay,  for  repairing  the  damage  done  to 
property  by  the  insurgents.  This  does  seem  rather 
hard  certainly.  However,  I  am  only  able  to  relate 
one  side,  so  of  course  can  form  no  opinion  on  the  real 
merits  of  either.  The  chief  cause  of  complaint 
against  Lord  Elgin  was,  that  although  he  knew  how 
very  objectionable  and  unpopular  this  measure  was, 
he  did  not  even  try  to  throw  the  responsibility  off  his 
own  shoulders,  which  he  might  have  done,  by  sending 
it  to  England  for  approval,  but,  on  the  contrary,  took 
it  all  on  himself  and  signed  it.  We  returned,  shortly 
after  hearing  all  this,  to  our  hotel.  At  6  P.M.  we  left 
in  the  Countess  of  Elgin  steamer,  for  Quebec,  where 
we  landed  on  Sunday  morning,  4th  September.  The 
harbour  and  shipping  ;  the  old-fashioned  houses  clustered one  above  another  up  the  steep  hill-side ;  the 
beautiful  St.  Lawrence ;  and  lastly,  the  renowned 
heights  of  Abraham  frowning  above  all,  give  Quebec 
a  most  imposing  appearance.  Our  eyes  were  still 
further  gladdened  by  the  sight  of  red  coats  on  landing, 
and  our  ears  by  the  merry  sound  of  the  bugle  calling 
our  own  regiments  to  parade. 

Now  I  shall  despatch  this  at  once,  and  give  Quebec 
a  letter  to  itself:  till  when  good  bye. 

Ever  yours, 

C. 