Russell's  Hotel,  Quebec,  September  5th.  —  My  dear 
Father, — If  I  remember  rightly,  my  last  letter  was 
closed  at  the  moment  of  our  arrival  at  Quebec.  With 
as  little  delay  as  possible,  our  time  of  sojourn  here 
being  limited,  we  commenced  making  acquaintance 
with  the  objects  of  interest  appertaining  to  the  place, 
and  of  these  the  first  chosen  was  the  scene  of  the 
battle,  of  course — the  gallant  attack  and  final  capture of  the  citadel  by  General  Wolfe.  The  "  Heights 
of  Abraham  "  is  a  singular  appellation,  but  I  can  find 
no  means  of  enlightenment  here  as  to  the  origin  of 
the  name.  There  is  a  fine  monument  erected  on  the 
spot  where  Wolfe  fell  (almost  in  the  moment  of 
victory),  but  it  is  sadly  defaced  by  the  relic-hunting 
people  who  have  come  here  at  different  times,  and 
who  have  actually  hewn  off  bits  of  the  stone  of 
which  it  is  composed  in  some  of  the  most  prominent 
places.  From  Cape  Diamond,  the  promontory  on 
which  the  citadel  is  built,  the  view  is  magnificent. 
The  St.  Lawrence  is  seen  winding  its  silvery  way 
through  forests  and  through  ravines  till  it  gradually 
fades  in  the  distance,  while  close  beneath  us,  ships  of 
all  nations,  some  in  movement,  some  riding  at  anchor, 
give  life  and  cheerfulness  to  the  scene.  On  leaving 
the  heights  to  descend  to  the  lower  world,  we  entered 
a  garden  attached  to  the  Government  house.  This  was 
once  private,  but  is  now  given  up  to  the  public  as  a 
sort  of  pleasure  ground.  There  stands  in  this  garden 
a  fine  pillar,  erected  to  the  memory  of  the  two  rival 
commanders  of  the  English  and  French  armies  during the  memorable  siege.  Singularly  enough,  they 
were  both  mortally  struck  almost  at  the  same  moment, 
although  Montcalm  survived  a  few  hours.  The 
monument  bears  an  inscription — short,  yet  eloquent, 
consisting  only  of  the  two  names  :  — "  Wolfe," 
"  Montcalm,"  on  either  side.  On  quitting  the  gar- 
den, the  custode  presented  us  with  two  very  handsome bouquets  which  he  had  gathered  for  us  while 
we  were  moralising  over  the  memento  to  the  rival 
heroes.  Quebec,  the  old  part  of  it  at  least,  is  most 
irregularly  built;  the  houses  sometimes,  when  seen 
from  a  little  distance,  give  the  idea  of  being  piled  one 
upon  the  top  of  another ;  but  this  very  peculiarity 
renders  it  far  more  picturesque  than  the  newer  and 
more  irreproachably  precise  towns  we  have  travelled 
through  in  the  States.  There  are  two  cathedrals, 
one  Protestant,  the  other  Catholic,  and  no  end  of 
nunneries  and  sisterhoods  of  various  denominations. 
In  the  chapel  of  the  Ursuline  convent  Montcalm  is 
buried;  on  his  tomb  is  the  following  inscription: 
"  Honneur  a  Montcalm.  Le  destin  en  lui  derobant  la 
victoire  1'a  recompense  par  une  mort  glorieuse." 
After  visiting  severally  the  above-mentioned  places, 
we  engaged  a  carriage  for  the  purpose  of  taking  us  to 
the  Falls  of  Montmorency,  which  we  reached  after  a 
drive  of  eight  miles  through  very  fine  scenery.  I 
was  both  astonished  and  delighted  with  this  waterfall, 
all  the  more  so,  perhaps,  that  I  had  heard  nothing 
about  it  beforehand.  Were  it  not  heresy  to  confess 
such  an  opinion,  I  am  not  sure  that  I  do  not  admire 
this  as  much  as  Niagara.  There  is  not,  indeed,  such 
an  immense  body  of  falling  water ;  but  then  the  height 
is  twice  as  great,  and  the  surrounding  scenery  is  far 
more  wild  and  romantic.  Byron's  description  of  the 
"Hell  of  Waters  "  is  thoroughly  realised  here.  The 
falls  are  encircled  by  huge  black  rocks,  and  beyond 
them  nothing  but  the  wide  expanse  of  the  river. 

5th. — This  morning  was  ushered  in  by  a  frost, 
and  altogether  a  bitterly  cold  day, — quite  time  to  get 
back  to  the  tropics,  I  think.  We  went  after  breakfast to  see  the  great  stronghold  of  Quebec,  the  Citadel, but  with  the  exception  of  some  "  lovely  soldiers" 

as used  to  call  them,  and  a  tame  bear  belonging 

to  one  of  the  regiments,  there  was  nothing  to  detain 
or  attract  unprofessional,  that  is,  non-military  visitors ; 
besides,  we  were  nearly  blown  away  by  a  piercing 
east  wind.  We  purpose  leaving  here  this  evening  en 
route  to  the  South,  so  I  shall  probably  post  this  previous to  our  departure.  Quebec,  Montreal,  indeed  I 
may  say,  Canada  generally,  has  pleased  me  much. 
The  people  are  so  gentle,  civil,  and  above  all,  so 
polished  in  manner.  They  combine  a  good  deal  of 
the  old  French  school  of  thorough  politeness  with 
our  natural  characteristic  of  frankness,  without  rudeness. Few  amalgamations  can,  I  think,  be  more  really 
allied  to  perfection  than  this,  and  I  regret  leaving  it 
as  much  as  it  is  possible  (for  me,  at  least)  to  regret 
leaving  a  cold  severe  climate  for  a  more  genial  atmosphere  In  consequence  of  a  slight  accident 

which  occurred  to  some  part  of  the  steamer's  machinery, a  delay  of  some  hours  has  ensued.  We  shall 
soon  be  off  now,  however,  so  I  will  close  my  letter. 
This  night's  journey  will  only  be  retracing  our  steps 
as  far  as  Montreal. 

Ever  your  affectionate, 

C. 