Albany,  September  1th. — You  will  see  by  the 
date  of  this,  my  dear  father,  that  we  are  now  considerably advanced  on  our  return  journey  to  New 
York,  hoping  to  reach  there  without  misadventure 
this  evening.  We  landed  at  Montreal  yesterday 
morning,  but  were  unfortunately  too  late  for  the 
fast  train;  our  progress  therefore  was  tedious  and 
fatiguing.  The  first  portion,  notwithstanding,  was 
not  unpleasant,  as  we  had  plenty  of  time  to  see  the 
different  places  through  which  we  passed,  and  also 
to  admire  the  scenery  of  Lake  Champlain,  on  the 
margin  of  which  our  route  lay  for  some  considerable 
distance,  till  we  reached  a  town  called  Burlington, 
a  busy  thriving  place,  and  apparently  a  central  point 
of  communication  by  land  and  water  to  all  parts. 
We  observed  several  fine  steamers  as  well  as  other 
vessels.  Had  the  weather  been  warmer  it  would 
doubtless  have  been  a  pleasanter  mode  of  travelling 
to  have  descended  the  lake  by  boat  instead  of  "  car ; " 
but  it  is  far  too  cold  for  aquatic  excursions  in  these 
northern  parts.  The  same  reason  will  prevent  our 
going  down  the  Hudson,  which,  as  I  said,  had  been 
our  previous  plan.  Soon  after  leaving  Burlington, 
the  night  began  to  close  in  upon  us,  and  the  most 
disagreeable  part  of  the  journey  ensued.  About 
two  o'clock  this  morning  we  arrived  at  a  village 
rejoicing  in  the  name  of  Eutland,  and  which  will 
long  remain  most  unfavourably  fixed  in  our  memory 
by  the  privations  we  had  to  endure.  It  should 
appear,  that  Rutland  is  one  of  the  places  subject  to 
the  operation  of  the  "Maine  Liquor  Law;"  and  you 
may  judge  how  comfortable  it  was  to  be  informed 
that  the  only  refreshment  we  could  obtain,  hungry, 
cold,  and  weary  as  we  were,  was  their  horrid  iced 
water !  wine  not  being  permitted  to  enter  the  State 
(Vermont  I  believe  it  was) ;  and  the  fires  being  all 
out,  we  could  not  get  a  cup  of  tea  or  coffee !  In 
this  hospitable  region  we  were  condemned  to  remain 
for  upwards  of  two  hours,  getting  colder  and  colder 
with  the  approach  of  dawn !  At  length,  as  all 
things  must  have  an  end,  we  made  a  fresh  start ; 
and  in  course  of  time  stopped  at  Saratoga,  where  I 
must  do  people  the  justice  to  say  an  excellent  breakfast was  provided,  though  I  was  half  afraid,  after  the 
experience  of  the  past  night,  that  we  might  only 
be  offered  some  of  the  mineral  waters  for  which 
Saratoga  is  celebrated.  This  watering-place  is  the 
Baden-Baden  of  America.  All  the  grand  monde 
flock  here  in  the  season ;  some  to  drink  the  waters, 
some  to  dress,  some  to  flirt.  In  short,  the  nature 
of  these  spas  seems  to  be  morally  the  same  all  the 
world  over.  Saratoga,  or  rather  "  The  Springs,"  which 
is  the  more  common  appellation,  being  now  deserted 
for  this  season,  most  of  the  hotels,  boarding-houses, 
&c.,  are  closed  until  next  summer.  The  next  station 
of  importance  we  came  to  bore  the  classic  name 
of  Troy,  but  as  we  only  remained  a  few  minutes  I 
cannot  tell  whether  it  deserves  so  high-sounding 
a  one ;  still  less  whether  there  are  any  grounds  for 
bestowing  the  respective  titles  of  Mount  Olympus 
and  Mount  Ida,  on  two  pieces  of  high  ground, 
scarcely  hills,  situated  on  the  northern  and  southern 
environs  of  the  town.  A  short  run  of  only  seven 
miles  brought  us  here,  the  prettiest  spot  (barring- 
New  York)  I  have  yet  seen  in  the  States,  built  on  the 
side  of  a  hill  bathed  by  the  river  Hudson.  Albany 
offers  a  most  commanding  appearance.  The  various 
public  buildings,  too,  are  constructed  and  placed  with 
equally  good  judgment  and  good  taste.  Of  these 
the  most  conspicuous  is  the  City  Hall,  almost  in  the 
centre  of  the  town,  the  dome  of  which  is  gilt,  consequently a  passing  sunbeam  falling  on  it  renders  it 
visible  at  a  great  distance.  I  am  sorry  our  time 
will  not  allow  us  more  than  this  superficial  view,  as 
we  doubtless  might  find  much  that  would  interest 
on  a  closer  examination.  Albany  received  its  name 
from  our  James  the  Second,  when  Duke  of  York 
and  Albany,  to  whom  a  grant  of  the  New  York 
territory  was  made  by  his  brother  Charles  after  his 
successful  contest  with  the  Dutch  in  1664.  .  .  . 
We  are  now  once  more  at  New  York,  having  resumed our  journey  from  Albany  half  an  hour  after 
the  above  lines  were  written.  Nothing  of  moment 
occurred  on  the  road  until  we  were  within  a  couple 
of  miles  of  our  destination,  when  we  had  the  misfortune to  run  against  a  horse  attached  to  a  cart 
imprudently  left  too  near  the  line  of  rails.  The 
poor  animal  was  killed  on  the  spot,  fortunately, 
in  a  moment,  but  it  was  a  shocking  sight  to  witness. 
.  .  .  .  I  regret  very  much  to  find  that  we  must 
relinquish  our  intended  visit  to  New  Orleans  and  the 
Mississippi.  This  is  a  great  disappointment.  I  had 
planned  it  all  so  well,  and  was  anticipating  a  most 
agreeable  expedition,  purposely  reserved  till  the  last, 
as,  from  all  I  have  heard,  it  is  the  best  worth  visiting 
of  all  the  wonders  of  the  United  States.  But  I'homme 
propose  et  Dieu  dispose.  The  yellow  fever  is  raging 
there  with  such  intensity  that  it  would  be  wickedness as  well  as  folly  to  make  the  attempt.  The 
latest  accounts  are  most  terrible.  The  devastation 
has  been  so  great  and  so  general  as  to  give  the  town 
the  appearance  of  a  city  of  the  dead.  Trade  and 
commerce,  even,  have  almost  ceased  temporarily.  As 
this  may  materially  alter  our  future  movements,  I 
shall  bring  this  letter  to  a  sudden  close  and  despatch 
it  by  to-morrow's  mail ;  but  you  may  expect  to 
hear  very  shortly  again,  informing  you  of  whatever 
fresh  projects  we  may  indulge  in.  Meanwhile  I  am 
ever  your  affectionate, 

C. 