New  York,  September  12th.  —  My  dear  Father,  — 
Since  returning  from  our  Canadian  excursion,  we 
have  been  occupied  in  revisiting  the  principal  objects 
of  attraction  in  New  York,  besides  adding  some  to  our 
list  which  had  been  previously  omitted.  Strangers  here 
make  a  point  of  going  over  the  splendid  hotels,  just 
as  elsewhere  one  would  visit  the  churches,  or  in 
London  the  clubs.  To  these  last,  the  New  York 
hotels  bear  indeed  the  principal  resemblance.  The 
St.  Nicholas  is,  I  think,  the  finest  specimen :  its 
fapade  of  white  marble  beautifully  sculptured,  and 
the  interior  very  like  the  Reform  Club.  In  addition 
to  the  public  living  rooms  there  are  some  very 
magnificently  decorated  and  furnished  ' '  bridal  chambers "  for  the  especial  benefit  of  newly  married  people 
who  may  have  the  moral  courage  to  go  and  spend 
their  honeymoon  en  evidence  before  all  the  world. 
But  I  believe  the  American  couples  do  not  make 
any  objection.  The  St.  Nicholas  is  no  less  than 
six  stories  high.  There  are  also  the  Metropolitan, 
the  New  York,  the  Astor  House,  and  Delmonico's,  all 
hotels  more  or  less  celebrated.  We  found  Taylor's, 
a  fine  establishment  on  the  principle  of  the  Parisian 
Restaurants,  to  be  very  well  worth  a  visit.  The 
saloon  where  you  dine  or  sup  is  scarcely  inferior  to 
"  Les  trois  Freres  "  in  magnificence  and  decoration, 
though,  by  a  curious  singularity  of  taste,  it  is  subterranean. We  went  with  our  friends  the  D.'s  the 
night  before  last  to  supper  there,  and  had  a  most 
excellent  repast.  Some  of  the  most  appreciated 
specimens  of  the  New  York  cuisine  were  ordered, 
so  that  we  might  know  what  was  considered  best. 
Fish  they  cook  in  great  perfection ;  oysters  especially, they  dress  in  innumerable  ways.  Two  dishes 
I  remarked  as  particularly  worthy  of  commendation, 
were  woodcocks  stewed  with  truffles  and  ecrevisses, 
and  ham  boiled  in  champagne.  Previously  to  this 
supper  party  we  had  been  to  Christy's  and  heard 
some  new  songs.  One  I  must  tell  you  all  about ;  the 
enthusiastic  manner  in  which  it  was  received,  showing pretty  plainly  what  Mrs.  Beecher  Stowe  may 
expect  if  she  returns  to  her  "am  countrie."  The 
song  purported  to  be  concerning  some  one  called 
"  Aunt  Sarah ;  "  but  was  evidently  directed  to  her. 
The  first  line  I  could  not  catch,  but  apostrophising 
Aunt  Sarah  it  continued  thus  :  — 
"  Go  talk  against  your  country  ! 
Put  money  in  your  purse ! 
But  when  the  happy  'Darkie' 
You  mention  in  your  prayer, 
Just  don't  forget  the  white  slave 
That's  starving  over  there ! " 

I  never  heard  such  a  cheer  in  my  life  as  burst  forth 
at  these  words ;  it  was  positively  terrific.  I  should 
not  like  to  be  in  Mrs.  S.'s  place  if  she  were  to  come 
back  before  her  country  people  have  time  to  cool 
down.  They  seem  inclined  to  make  her  pay  rather 
dearly  for  what  she  has  written ;  but,  from  all  I  can 
gather  at  present,  the  Americans,  and  especially  the 
American  women,  are  annoyed  that  a  party  of  English 
women,  including  members  of  our  aristocracy,  should 
have  (to  speak  plainly),  without  knowing  what  they 
were  talking  about,  issued  a  sort  of  manifesto  containing a  number  of  positive  errors  in  point  of  fact, 
and  arguing  upon  premises  and  assumptions  which 
did  not  exist.  So  say  the  people  here,  at  least ;  for 
my  part,  I  know  nothing  of  the  matter,  pour  ou 
contre,  beyond  trying,  but  unsuccessfully,  to  wade 
through  "  Uncle  Tom/'  by  which  I  obtained  as  much, 
or  rather  more,  information  on  the  subject  than  I  required. .  .  .  Yesterday  we  paid  a  visit  to  the 
Croton  Waterworks,  a  wonderful  monument  of  human 
industry.  The  great  reservoir  is  said  to  be  five  miles 
long,  and  is  able  to  contain  five  million  gallons  of 
water.  This  being  forty  miles  off  we  did  not  see,  but 
contented  ourselves  with  the  more  easily  attained 
portion  of  the  works  where  the  aqueduct  crosses  the 
Harlem  Kiver,  at  a  distance  of  about  eight  miles. 
This  spot  is  called  the  High  Bridge,  and  well  merits 
the  slight  trouble  of  the  excursion.  The  view  is  fine, 
I  should  think,  under  all  circumstances,  but  especially now  that  the  trees  are  beginning  to  wear  their 
autumnal  tints;  the  hues  are  so  dazzling,  so  rich,  so 
varied,  that  I  must  renounce,  as  hopeless,  any  effort 
at  description,  for  I  am  sure  you  would  accuse  me  of 
exaggeration.  For  my  own  part,  were  I  to  see,  or 
rather  to  have  seen,  such  colours  transferred  to  canvass, I  should  have  unhesitatingly  exclaimed,  "  That  is 
unnatural !  "  I  must  not  forget  to  notice  in  this  chronicle of  things  new  and  strange  the  steam  ferry-boats 
which  we  have  now  used  on  several  occasions,  in  the 
course  of  our  excursions  to  the  various  environs  of  the 
city :  viz.,  New  Jersey,  Brooklyn,  Staten  Island,  &c. 
Their  appearance  is  that  of  a  little  floating  town. 
Seen  at  a  short  distance,  one  might  fancy  a  block  of 
houses  had  detached  itself  from  the  remainder  of  the 
street,  and  gone  for  an  aquatic  promenade,  accom- 
panied by  all  the  men,  women,  children,  horses,  carriages, carts,  pigs,  dogs,  baskets,  and  wheelbarrows  it 
could  find  on  the  way.  A  voyage  in  one  of  these 
monster  conveyances  is  one  of  the  most  amusing 
incidents  in  the  New  York  life,  at  least  to  a  stranger. 
We  have  paid  several  visits  to  the  Great  Exhibition 
which  has  been  opened  here  in  imitation  of  the  London building.  This  too  is  chiefly  of  glass.  It  is 
in  a  circular  form,  but  much  smaller  and  every  way 
inferior  to  ours.  It  is,  however,  a  very  good  bazaar, 
but  that  is  all ;  moreover,  I  am  informed  it  is  a  mere 
private  speculation,  and  that,  consequently,  the  President was  rather  embarrassed  at  finding  Lord  Ellesmere  was  sent  on  behalf  of  our  Queen. 

This  is  our  last  day  at  New  York.  We  are  to  sail 
to-morrow,  bound  for  Mexico,  as  the  few  hurried  lines 
I  last  wrote  will  have  informed  you ;  I  will  have  a 
letter  all  prepared  to  despatch  from  Havana,  giving 
you  the  latest  intelligence.  Till  then  adieu. 
Your  ever  affectionate, 

C. 
