Vera  Cruz,  September  28th. —  At  length  we  have 
safely  passed  the  dangers  and  overcome  the  delays  of 
our  voyage,  and  have  landed  here  all  well  this  morning. Nearly  the  whole  of  the  first  part  of  our  progress after  leaving  New  York  consisted,  however,  of 
a  series  of  disasters  and  discomforts  ;  and  although  we 
fortunately  reached  Havana  in  time  to  catch  the  Mexican mail,  we  nevertheless  took  eight  days  in  accomplishing what  is  usually  done  in  four,  namely,  the 
passage  between  the  two  ports. 

As  I  before  mentioned,  the  vessel  was  in  a  very 
unfinished  condition,  and  among  the  minor  evils  we 
had  to  endure  was  the  sticking  to  everything  we 
touched,  the  paint  and  varnish  being  quite  fresh : 
then  in  the  hurry  of  departure  they  had  forgotten  to 
provide  lamps  to  light  either  the  saloon  or  cabins,  so 
at  sunset  we  were  obliged  to  turn  into  our  berths, 
until  the  weather  getting  warmer  as  we  approached 
Havana  enabled  us  to  stay  on  deck  at  night.  Last 
and  worst  of  all,  when  we  had  been  at  sea  barely 
two  days  we  were  alarmed  in  the  middle  of  the  night 
by  the  vessel  suddenly  coining  to  a  dead  stop.  Soon  one 
passenger  after  another  stole  up  to  inquire  what  had 
happened,  but  did  not  come  down  again ;  so,  to  end 
this  state  of  suspense,  I  dressed  myself  as  well  as  I 
could  in  the  dark  and  went  on  deck.  All  the  information I  could  get  from  the  captain,  who  was  in  a 
shockingly  bad  humour,  was  that  something,  I  forget 
what,  had  burst,  but  there  was  no  danger,  "  if  the 
weather  kept  calm."  This  was  anything  but  pleasant 
intelligence ;  luckily,  however,  the  calm  continued, 
and  with  our  disabled  engine  we  reached  Havana  at 
length,  as  I  have  said,  in  seven  days  more.  Since 
the  accident  we  proceeded,  I  am  informed,  at  the  rate 
of  three  knots  an  hour  only.  We  had  no  sails  either, 
that  part  of  the  "  fixings,"  like  many  others,  not  being 
completed.  But  from  Havana  I  am  glad  to  say  all 
has  gone  prosperously.  A  sunny  sky  and  a  calm  sea. 
We  passed  in  safety  the  famous  fi  Alacranes,"  Anglice 
"  Scorpions,"  a  dangerous  reef  of  rocks  so  called  ;  the 
terror  of  all  sea-going  people  in  these  parts.  Besides 
the  ordinary  danger  of  being  driven  upon  them  in 
stormy  weather,  there  is  the  additional  peril  of  a  current so  strong  as  to  render  it  excessively  difficult, 
under  the  most  favourable  circumstances,  to  keep  a 
correct  "reckoning,"  as  I  believe  it  is  nautically 
termed,  consequently  many  have  been  the  ships 
drawn  to  their  destruction.  Even  steamers  do  not 
escape  sometimes :  within  the  last  ten  years,  two  of 
the  West  India  packets  have  been  wrecked  on  the 
Alacranes.  Before  casting  anchor  in  the  bay  of  Yera 
Cruz  we  passed  the  famous  castle  and  fortress  of  St. 
Jean  d'Ulloa.  It  seems  much  the  worse  for  the  siege 
by  the  Prince  de  Joinville  in  1838.  The  country  has 
been  also  in  too  disturbed  a  state,  apparently,  to 
allow  of  reparations  being  made.  Landed  at  nine 
o'clock,  and  in  consequence  of  the  English  consul 
having  written  a  very  civil  note,  putting  himself  and 
all  he  possessed  at  my  disposition,  we  went  at  once  to 
his  house  and  were  received  most  cordially.  Found 
a  large  budget  of  letters  from  England  awaiting  us, 
and  after  having  perused  them  and  made  necessary 
inquiries  concerning  the  ways  and  means  of  journeying to  Mexico  from  here,  we  went  to  the  Hotel  de  las 
Diligencias,  where  we  shall  remain  until  to-morrow 
afternoon.  I  am  rather  agreeably  surprised  with 
the  general  appearance  of  Vera  Cruz,  having  heard  it 
described  as  a  "  hole  ;"  in  short,  as 'everything  that  was 
bad,  whereas  I  find  it  anything  but  dirty,  and  tolerably wide  streets,  and  by  no  means  offensive  looking, 
rather  the  contrary.  It  has  a  look  of  antiquity,  and,  to  a 
certain  degree,  of  sadness,  but  that  rather  adds  to  the 
interest  of  its  aspect.  The  first  peculiarity  I  observed 
was  a  crowd  of  vultures,  called  here  "  Sopilotes." 
They  hover  about  in  all  directions,  looking  for  prey, 
anything  dead  which  may  fall  in  their  way.  They 
are  melancholy  looking  creatures,  but  quite  tame. 
Apropos  of  beasts  of  prey ;  just  before  landing  to-day, 
we  amused  ourselves  in  watching  the  manoeuvres  of 
a  shark  who  kept  swimming  all  round  us,  apparently 
in  the  hope  of  catching  something  good  for  his  breakfast. I  fear  he  was  disappointed  in  his  expectations, 
as,  With  the  exception  of  a  small  piece  of  dry  bread 
which  the  cook  had  thrown  at  him)  there  was  nothing 
to  satisfy  his  craving.  At  three  o'clock  we  dined  and 
had  our  first  experience  of  Mexican  cookery.  The 
dishes  are  rather  strongly  seasoned  with  chilis,  peppers, &c.,  but  no  doubt,  when  once  accustomed  to  the 
cuisine  I  shall  find  it  by  no  means  bad.  The  sauces 
are  excellent,  and  very  scientifically  mixed.  Took  a 
walk  this  evening  with  the  young  son  of  the  English 
consul,  who  good-naturedly  volunteered  to  be  our 
cicerone.  We  directed  our  steps  first  to  the  Alameda, 
a  name  given  generally  to  the  public  promenades  in 
Mexico.  The  scene  here  was  very  pretty,  and  with 
the  adjuncts  of  a  setting  sun,  a  clear  bright  sky,  and 
an  old  ruined  castle,  was  almost  romantic.  To-morrow 
we  start  on  our  adventurous  journey.  I  wonder  what 
will  become  of  us  between  this  and  Mexico.  We  hear 
wonderful  tales  of  robbery,  but  we  must  hope  for  the 
best.  So  now  farewell  for  the  present. 

Your  ever  affectionate, 
C. 