Jalapa,  September  30th.~ -My  dear  Father, —  We 
arrived  here  at  5  o'clock  this  afternoon,  nine  hours 
after  our  time ;  but  the  wonder  seems  to  me  that  we 
are  here  at  all.  Such  roads !  or  rather  such  a  want 
of  them.  The  old  adage  came  to  my  recollection, 
"  If  you'd  seen  these  roads  before  they  were  made," 
&c.  But  we  have  seen  these.  It  is  perfectly  incomprehensible to  me  how  any  carriages  built  by  mortal 
hands  could  bear  even  one  of  the  fearful  knocks,  or 
rather  I  should  say,  leaps,  of  which  we  have  been 
suffering  a  succession  to-day  and  last  night.  We  had 
generally  eight  horses  or  mules  drawing  us,  and  I  do 
not  think  I  am  exaggerating  when  I  say  that,  during 
the  nineteen  hours  we  have  been  on  the  road,  we 
have  not  passed  over  100  yards  of  level  ground; 
stones,  holes,  rocks,  sand-banks,  chasms  both  wide 
and  deep — over  all  of  which  we  made  a  succession  of 
leaps.  In  short,  I  am  almost  too  much  bruised  and 
shaken  to  describe  our  progress :  if  this  continues,  I 
don't  think  we  shall  have  a  whole  bone  left  in  our 
bodies.  To  mend  matters,  we  had  to  get  out  of  the 
diligence  two  or  three  times  in  the  middle  of  the 
night,  and  walk  some  distance  through  the  mud  and 
in  the  dark,  so  as  to  lighten  the  conveyance  sufficiently to  enable  it  to  take  a  kind  of  flying  leap  over 
some  unusually  wide  chasm  in  the  road.  Apart  from 
these  grievances,  however,  and  when  we  could  manage 
to  keep  ourselves  still  for  a  few  minutes  at  a  time, 
and  look  around  us,  the  scenery  was  most  lovely, 
and  the  approach  to  Jalapa  will  never  be  effaced  from 
my  recollection.  How  nature  has  showered  every 
beauty  and  every  blessing  on  this  land !  I  have  read 
in  fairy  tales,  and  in  descriptions  of  what  Paradise 
was  supposed  to  be,  of  scenes  something  like  this  ; 
but  that  such  places  really  existed  on  the  earth 
I  could  not  have  believed  unless  I  had  come  here. 

October  1st. — We  slept  last  night  at  Jalapa,  being 
far  too  much  tired  to  attempt  continuing  our  route, 
so  shall  wait  and  take  our  chance  of  finding  vacant 
places  in  the  carriage  to-day.  Eeceived  a  visit  from 
Mr.  Kennedy,  an  English  gentleman  living  here,  and 
to  whom  I  had  a  le'tter  of  introduction,  and  who  is 
to  show  us  all  the  beauties  of  Jalapa  if  we  should 
not  leave  this  afternoon.  Meanwhile,  as  I  was  writing the  above,  I  was  interrupted  by  the  diligence 
dashing  or  rather  leaping  up  to  the  door,  and  finding 
that  there  were  two  vacant  places  we  were  soon  again 
en  route.  As  we  advanced,  the  scenery  was,  if  possible,  even  more  enchanting  than  on  the  other  side  of 
Jalapa.  The  most  distinguishing  feature,  at  least,  so 
it  appears  to  me,  is  the  profusion — the  wilderness  of 
flowers  spread  on  every  side.  The  ground  is  literally 
enamelled  with  them,  and  every  tree  and  shrub 
loaded  with  the  most  beautiful  and  brilliant  hued 
parasites  clinging  and  creeping  to  the  topmost  boughs 
of  even  the  highest  trees.  So  dazzling  an  array  of 
colours  I  never  saw  grouped  together —  crimson,  scarlet, blue,  orange,  purple,  of  all  forms  and  sizes,  and 
last,  though  not  least  in  loveliness,  the  pure  white 
blossoms  of  the  datura,  the  most  ordinary  of  wild 
flowers  here,  and  named  "El  Floripundio."  The 
snowy  peak  of  Orizava,  which  we  had  constantly  in 
sight  yesterday,  was  now  hidden  from  our  view.  I 
believe  the  next  mountain  of  importance  we  shall 
make  acquaintance  with  will  be  the  Cofre  de  Perote, 
about  half  way  between  Vera  Cruz  and  Mexico. 

October  4;th,  Hotel  San  Augustin,  Mexico. — We 
reached  here  yesterday  at  4  P.M.,  after  several  hairbreadth escapes  and  adventures  which  I  shall  now 
try  to  record  ;  but  the  constant  travelling  and  excessive fatigue  quite  prevented  me  writing  daily  since 
quitting  Jalapa.  On  that  same  night,  the  1st  October, got  to  Perote  about  11  o'clock,  a  dismal-looking 
place,  and  where  we  had  to  sleep  almost  in  a  stable 
yard — that  is,  our  bed-room  was  only  separated  by 
means  of  a  glass  door  from  the  various  denizens  of 
the  stable  and  farm.  The  sleeping,  however,  was 
but  nominal,  as  we  were  aroused  again  at  three  in 
the  morning,  and  tired,  cold,  and  exhausted,  with 
sleepy  companions  and  a  lowering  sky  we  set  forth 
on  our  night  march.  The  only  satisfactory  reflexion 
we  enjoyed  being,  that  we  were  provided  with  an 
armed  escort ;  as  soon  as  daylight  appeared,  however, 
they  left  us. 