October  2nd. — This  day's  journey  was  very  tedious  and 
wearying,  an  almost  constant  ascent.  The  air  becoming colder  and  colder,  the  country  arid  and  sandy. 
The  flowers  had  left  us,  and  in  their  stead  there  was 
little  to  be  seen  save  some  dwarf  pines  and  patches 
of  brushwood  here  and  there,  but  all  the  rest  a  sandy 
waste.  Above  all  loomed  the  black  and  gloomy 
Cofre  de  Perote,  so  named  from  the  summit  of  the 
mountain  being  shaped  like  a  box  or  chest,  for  which 
"  Cofre  "  is  the  Spanish  word.  Towards  the  end  of 
the  day,  however,  matters  began  again  to  improve, 
and  I  have  no  doubt,  if  we  had  been  able  to  distinguish the  scenery,  we  should  have  been  better  pleased; 
but  it  was  seven  o'clock  when  we  reached  Puebla,  and 
very  nearly  dark.  There  we  enjoyed  a  refreshing 
night's  rest,  preceded  by  an  excellent  supper.  We 
were  offered,  among  other  dishes,  some  very  nice 
preserve,  called  Cabella  de  Angel,  or  Angel's  hair, 
a  fanciful  and  pretty  name.  It  has  the  appearance 
of  long  golden  threads,  and  tastes  like  crystallised 
sugar.  I  could  not  make  out  of  what  it  was  made. 
At  a  little  village  on  our  road  to  day,  we  had  for  the 
first  time  some  pulque,  the  national  and  favourite 
drink  of  the  Mexicans.  It  is  most  abominable  both 
in  scent  and  taste ;  yet  it  is  said,  that  although  the 
first  impression  with  every  one  is  the  same,  that 
nevertheless  in  a  very  short  time  you  not  only  get 
accustomed  to  it,  but  become  most  inordinately  fond 
of  it.  This  may  be  so,  but  I  do  not  think  we  shall 
be  long  enough  in  Mexico  to  acquire  the  taste. 
"  Pulque "  is  made,  I  believe,  from  the  flower  of 
the  maguey  plant,  a  sort  of  large  aloe,  which  grows 
in  profusion  all  over  the  country.  Hedges  and 
fences  are  here  made  by  nature,  both  of  the  maguey 
and  the  prickly  pear.  The  latter  is  generally  called 
by  its  Indian  name,  "Nopal,"  and  is  used  as  the 
national  emblem  on  the  coins,  like  our  rose,  thistle, 
and  shamrock.  We  must  hope  for  an  opportunity 
of  seeing  Puebla  on  our  return,  as  this  time,  having 
arrived  after  dark  and  started  before  four  in  the 
morning,  we  were  unable  to  judge  of  its  appearance. 
In  point  of  size  and  population  it  is  the  next  to  Mexico. 
Yesterday,  though  the  last  day  of  our  journey  hither, 
was  the  most  fertile  in  adventure.  First  of  all,  we 
had  to  pass  through  the  "  robbers'  tract "  of  country, 
and  were  for  some  hours  in  momentary  expectation 
of  being  attacked.  The  spot  chosen  by  these  heroes 
for  their  depredations  is  singularly  well  adapted  for 
the  purpose ;  a  dark  thick  wood  concealing  two  deep 
ravines  on  either  side,  rocks  and  caves  in  all  directions, afford  excellent  ground  for  ambuscade  and 
sudden  attacks  on  the  unwary.  This  part  of  the 
country  is  very  appropriately  named  the  "  Black 
Hole."  We  were  fortunately,  however,  quittes 
pour  la  peur,  and  saw  no  living  robber.  But  about 
three  miles  after  leaving  Eio  Frio,  a  small  village 
.where  we  had  stopped  to  breakfast,  we  were  horrified 
at  passing,  within  a  distance  of  half  a  yard,  the  body 
of  a  man  hung  to  the  branches  of  a  tree  by  a  cord 
passed  round  his  waist.  The  upper  part  of  his 
body  was  naked  and  much  stained  with  blood,  apparently recently  shed.  It  was  a  shocking  spectacle, but  what  his  history  was  we  had  yet  to  learn. 
On  reaching  Mexico  in  the  evening,  we  heard 
to  our  consternation  that  the  diligence,  which 
left  Vera  Cruz  the  day  before  us  (and  in  which  I  was 
rather  vexed  at  not  being  able  to  secure  places),  had 
been  robbed  on  the  road,  and  everything  taken  from 
the  passengers.  A  young  man,  Mr.  Buchanan,  one 
of  our  fellow  voyagers  in  the  Avon  to  Vera  Cruz, 
begged  the  bandits  to  let  him  keep  his  desk,  after 
they  should  have  convinced  themselves  that  it  contained nothing  but  private  papers  of  his  own, 
and  of  no  use  to  any  one  else.  The  man  of  whom 
he  asked  this  favour  consented,  and  was  about  to 
give  him  back  his  desk,  when  one  of  the  robbers 
demurred,  and  insisted  on  taking  it.  It  was  this 
very  man  who  was  shot,  and  whose  body  we  saw 
hanging  to  the  tree.  It  appeared  that  the  diligence, having  met  a  party  of  soldiers  soon  after  their 
attack,  told  them  what  had  occurred,  and  on  which 
they  had  immediately  proceeded  to  the  scene  of 
action.  Before  long  they  overtook  the  gang,  shot 
one  dead,  as  it  happened,  he  who  had  the  desk  in 
his  hands,  and  wounded  two  of  the  others.  They 
hung  up  the  dead  man  at  once  to  a  tree,  as  a 
warning.  All  robbers  now  caught  are  instantly 
shot  without  trial,  and  their  bodies  hung  up  in 
terrorem  as  a  warning  to  others.  This  is  Santa 
Anna's  last  edict.  A  dreadfully  severe  one,  certainly, 
and  yet  it  seems  impossible  to  remedy  the  evil. 
The  constant  revolutions  and  changes  of  government 
in  this  distracted  country  have  the  effect  of  rendering the  law  a  dead  letter.  To  turn  from  this 
unpleasant  theme,  I  must  note  down  some  observations on  the  world-famed  valley  of  Mexico,  as  the 
view  of  it  bursts,  or  ought  to  burst,  on  the  sight  on 
attaining  the  heights  "  about  forty  miles  from  the 
city.  After  traversing  many  miles  of  unceasing  toil, 
jumps,  jolts,  and  leaps,  we  at  length  gained  the  long- 
wished  for  eminence  whence  Mexico  in  all  her  glory 
should  have  shown  herself  to  our  longing  gaze.  But, 
alas  for  mortal  expectations !  the  clouds  had  collected deeply  and  thickly,  and  of  the  splendid  panorama  we  had  anticipated  scarcely  two-thirds  were 
visible.  The  two  snow-crowned  volcanoes,  Popocatepetl and  Iztaccihuatl,  were  completely  shrouded  in 
mist ;  so  that  altogether  we  must  class  the  "  view  "  as 
a  dreamy  to  come  true  in  the  future  I  hope.  To-day 
we  have  done  nothing  beyond  "fixing"  ourselves, 
as  the  Yankees  say, — installed  ourselves  comfortably 
in  our  rooms,  unpacked  our  things,  and  received  a 
visit  from  our  Minister,  Mr.  Doyle ;  after  which  we 
occupied  ourselves  till  dusk  in  looking  out  of  the 
window,  here  a  very  edifying  employment,  when 
every  human  being  that  passes  is  a  picture  in  him 
or  herself.  We  took  a  short  walk  this  evening  in 
the  Plaza.  The  people  most  do  congregrate  in  a 
part  of  it  called  las  Cadences,  from  the  chains 
linking  together  the  rails  in  front  of  the  cathedral. 
I  shall  now  conclude  this  long  letter,  hoping  it  may 
reach  its  destination  safely. 

Ever  your  affectionate, 

C. 