Mexico,  Hotel   San   Augustin,    October    9th. — My 

dear  Father, I  hope  this  will  be  an  acceptable 

present  to  you,  being  the  only  birth-day  memorial 
circumstances  at  this  moment  allow  of  my  sending. 
We  found  full  occupation  the  first  morning  or  two 
after  our  arrival  in  making  topographical  discoveries, 
and  tracing  out  a  few  plans  of  our  future  movements. 
In  the  former  there  is  not  much  difficulty,  for  the 
streets  are  large,  wide,  and  run  chiefly  at  right  aogles 
from  one  another.  It  is  a  very  beautiful  town,  judging of  it  even  by  its  external  appearance  only  :•  it  may 
well  be  called  a  city  of  palaces,  for  I  do  not  recollect 
observing  a  single  poor  or  mean-looking  house  in  it. 
The  extreme  clearness  of  the  atmosphere  causes  even 
the  far-distant  mountains  to  appear  close  at  the  end 
of  the  vista  formed  in  every  street ;  yet  the  nearest 
mountain  is  forty  miles  off.  ....  When  cliez  moi  I 
find  the  attraction  of  the  balcony  almost  irresistible. 
The  men  with  their  graceful  "  serapes,"  and  the 
women  with  their  ungraceful  "  rebosos  " — the  dark 
eyes  and  swarthy  complexions  common  to  both  sexes ; 
then  add  to  these  the  singular,  and,  in  some  instances, 
musical  cries  of  the  various  vendors  of  goods,  eatables, and  drinkables,  and  you  have  a  scene  quite 
unsurpassable  in  its  way.  The  varieties  of  complexion are  curious ;  every  shade  from  pale  yellow  to 
dark  copper  colour  is  to  be  found  here.  The  "serape  " 
is  a  kind  of  double  blanket  of  the  most  brilliant  and 
varied  hues  :  a  hole  in  the  centre  admits  the  head  of 
the  wearer,  and  the  two  ends  may  be  worn  either 
simply  hanging  down  from  the  neck,  before  and 
behind,  or  may  be  twisted  round  the  body,  or  thrown 
mantilla-fashion  over  the  shoulders.  Among  other 
natural  curiosities  I  saw  an  Indian  chief  going  to  sell 
some  embroidered  things  at  market.  He  was  dressed 
in  a  tunic  of  fur,  and  wore  a  beautiful  crown  of 
ostrich  feathers  on  his  head.  I  do  not  think  the 
Mexican  people  have  good  expressions,  though  their 
features  are  generally  handsome;  but  they  have  a 
downward  look  about  the  eyes  which  is  unpleasant, 
and  gives  one  the  idea  of  their  having  some  mischief 
always  lurking  somewhere.  They  are  a  strange  people from  all  accounts :  they  would  think  nothing  of 
murdering  you,  with  or  without  reason ;  yet  they  are 
as  civil,  as  kind,  as  ready  to  oblige,  as  warm  in  manner, and  as  anxious  to  please,  as  if  your  pleasure  was 
their  only  care,  and  that  not  only  to  strangers  but  to 
each  other.  It  is  difficult  to  reconcile  this  apparent 
warm-heartedness  with  the   cruel  and  blood-thirsty 
natures  they  show  sometimes. 

We  rode  on  horseback  yesterday  morning  to  Chapultepec,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Berkeley  and  Mr. 
Portman,  the  two  attaches.  A  most  beautiful  ride, 
and  affording  a  far  finer  view  of  Mexico  than  from 
the  Vera  Cruz  side.  This  grand  old  place,  so  much 
associated  with  some  of  the  most  stirring  events  connected with  the  Mexican  Conquest  and  the  history  of 
the  days  of  Cortez  and  Montezuma,  must  look  very 
different  now  from  what  was  its  aspect  then  :  so  different, indeed,  that,  could  any  of  the  actors  in  those 
scenes  now  rise  from  their  graves  and  look  upon  it, 
I  should  doubt  their  being  able  to  recognise,  in  the 
stately  but  sad  Chapultepec  of  the  present  day,  the 
bright  and  flowery  gardens  of  which  we  read  so 
charming  a  description  in  the  glowing  pages  of 
Prescott.  Here  is  to  be  seen  one  of  the  few  exceptions to  the  rule  of  the  unchangeableness  of  nature. 
Scarcely  three  hundred  years  have  elapsed,  yet  what 
is  now  covered  with  corn-fields,  potatoes,  tobacco,  and 
other  necessaries  of  life  to  the  modern  Mexican,  was 
then  a  vast  lake,  reflecting  on  its  glassy  surface  the 
cypress  trees  and  pleasure  gardens  of  this  favourite 
resort  of  Montezuma.  The  aqueduct,  too,  now 
broken  and  in  ruins,  like  those  on  the  old  Eoman 
Campagna,  then  conveyed  its  pure  and  bountiful  supplies to  all  the  thirsty  city.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
most  striking  feature  now  offered  to  the  eye  is  the 
magnificent  castle  or  stronghold,  built  on  the  summit 
of  the  porphyry  rock,  once  the  burial  place  of  the 
Indian  kings.    One  of  the  Spanish  vice-kings,  named 
Gralvez,  was  the  projector  and  builder  of  this  fortress, 
towards  the  end  of  the  last  century.     His  avowed 
purpose  was  simply  the  erection  of  a  summer  residence for  his  own  pleasure,  but  as  the  work  of  construction advanced  it  assumed  so  greatly  the  form  of 
a  fortification,  which  in  such  a  neighbourhood  was 
considered   by  the   Government  at  home,   and  not 
unreasonably,  I  think,  as  too  regal  an  abode  for  a 
subject,  and  consequently  it  was  annexed   by  the 
Crown,  though  unlike  some  other  annexations  I  have 
heard  of,  Gralvez,  the  original  owner,  was  well  compensated for  his  outlay.     But  the  building  was  never 
furnished  internally,  having,  even  in  its  present  state, 
says  Madame  Calderon  de  la  Barca,  cost  the  Spanish 
300,000   dollars.       The  general   appearance,  shape, 
and  situation  of  the  Castle  of  Chapultepec  reminds 
me  very  much  (its  colour  only  excepted)  of  the  old 
Grerman   fortress  of  Heidelberg.      The    rocky   and 
wooded  hill,  the  river  and  the  valley,  with  the  fertile 
plain    spread   beyond,    mark   both.       Further    the 
parallel  cannot   be  drawn,  as  from   Heidelberg  no 
splendid  imperial   city  can  be  seen.      It  would  be 
difficult  indeed  to  find  one  in  Europe  now  that  could 
compare  in  grandeur  with  Mexico.     Eome  or  Athens 
in  former  days  might  have  done  so,  but  in  their 
present  state  can  scarcely  even  rival  her  in  architecture (barring  always  St.  Peter's,  which  stands  alone 
"  of  temples  old  or  altars  new  ").  The  present  Republican  Government  have  turned  the  old  Castle  into 
a  college,  for  teaching  young  military  ideas  how  to 
shoot.  Entirely  surrounding  the  sides  and  base  of 
the  hill  on  which  the  Castle  is  built  are  the  most 
gigantic  cypress  trees  that  I  imagine  exist  in  the 
world ;  their  appearance  is  altogether  so  extraordinary, that  when  once  they  have  arrested  the  attention 
it  is  difficult  either  to  look  at  or  think  of  anything 
else.  It  is  certain  from  the  ancient  chronicles  and 
accounts  that  have  been  handed  down  to  us,  that 
these  trees  were  not  only  living  but  had  attained 
their  full  growth  at  the  time  of  Cortez's  invasion  and 
conquest.  One  of  these,  called  par  excellence  Montezuma's,  is  of  the  immense  circumference  of  fifty  feet. 
They  all  now  wear  a  most  curious  appearance ;  a 
kind  of  parasite,  or  moss  of  a  greyish  white  colour, 
twines  about  their  trunks,  and  hangs  in  wild  profusion from  their  branches.  It  has  the  exact  appearance of  long  grey  hair,  and,  especially  being  contrasted with  the  deep  almost  black  colour  of  the 
cypress  branches,  has  a  most  singular  effect.  The 
local  names  given  to  these  hairy-looking  masses  are 
"  Bisnagas  "  or  "  Cabeza  de  Viejo  "  (old  man's  head). 
The  cypress  trees  themselves  are  called  "Ahuahuetes." 
After  wandering  about  for  some  time  in  the  "  cold 
shade  "  of  this  forest  "  aristocracy/'  we  remounted 
our  steeds  and  went  to  Tacubaya,  which  formed  a 
kind  of  suburb  of  Mexico,  and  is  a  good  deal  frequented by  the  residents  there  when  they  wish  to 
change  air  or  scene.  There  are  several  pretty  villas, with  gardens  attached,  studded  about.  In  one 
of  these  we  were  very  hospitably  entertained  at 
breakfast ;  our  host  was  an  Englishman,  Mr.  Greaves, 
with  a  pretty  wife  and  sister-in-law,  both  much 
admired  in  this  country,  where  the  fair  and  bright 
English  complexion  is  as  rare  as  beautiful.  Tacubaya 
would  almost  appear  to  be  one  vast  flower  garden ; 
the  profusion  of  roses  of  all  hues  and  sizes  is  really 
astonishing.  Among  other  notable  personages  who 
are  ruralising  here  at  present  is  General  Santa  Anna, 
the  actual  President  of  the  Mexican  Kepublic,  consequently, one  constantly  meets  or  is  overtaken  by 
aide-de-camps,  messengers,  soldiers,  &c.,  riding  in 
hot  haste  to  and  fro ;  some  of  them,  too,  looking  so 
big  with  importance  that  they  might  have  been 
bearers,  at  least,  of  tidings  of  some  new  pronunciamento.  Before  returning  home  we  went  to  the  top 
of  Mr.  G-eaves's  house,  called  the  "  Azotea,"  to  look 
at  the  surrounding  view,  which  is  the  same  as  from 
Chapultepec,  but  with  the  very  important  addition  of 
that  fine  old  castle  and  its  grey-bearded  trees,  "which 
it  need  scarcely  be  said  are  no  inconsiderable  features 
in  the  general  beauty  of  the  landscape. 

I  find  I  have  forgotten  to  mention  that  the  day 
before  yesterday  we  dined  at  the  Embassy  with  Mr. 
Doyle,  and  afterwards  accompanied  him  to  the  opera, 
called  (till  further  orders)  El  Teatro  de  Santa  Anna. 
It  is  a  good-sized  house,  and  handsomely  though 
heavily  decorated ;  but  it  is  far  inferior  in  every  way 
to  the  Tacon  at  Havana.  The  performers,  on  the 
other  hand,  seem  better ;  the  voices  excellent ;  and 
for  the  most  part  both  men  and  women  seem  to  be 
thorough  musicians.  It  would  be  difficult  to  pronounce upon  their  personal  appearance,  however,  for 
the  theatre  is  so  badly  lighted  that  one  person  can 
scarcely  be  distinguished  from  another. 

We  rode  this  morning  to  the  Paseo  before  breakfast. Notwithstanding  the  early  hour,  all  the  world 
was  abroad  in  carriages  or  on  horseback.  The  former 
are  lumbering  awkward  looking  machines,  something 
like  German  coaches.  Singularly  enough,  they  do 
not  seem  here  to  have  a  notion  of  the  pleasure  or 
convenience  of  an  open  carriage;  the  more  inexplicable an  omission  in  a  climate  so  peculiarly  adapted 
for  such  an  enjoyment.  It  seemed  to  me  quite  a 
waste  of  the  bounties  of  nature,  with  a  warm  but  not 
hot  sun  shining,  a  soft  and  balmy  air,  to  see  half  a 
'dozen  people  caged  up  in  one  of  these  ponderous 
vehicles,  one  head  peeping  above  another  at  the  narrow  window.  This  can  scarcely  be  called  taking  an 
airing.  Nothing  can  be  more  picturesque,  on  the 
other  hand,  than  the  Mexican  cavalier's  costume, 
when  adhered  to  in  its  true  character,  and  not  "  improved," or  "  spoilt "  (the  terms  in  this  case  being 
synonymous),  by  the  introduction  of  English  or 
Yankee  fashions.  The  dress  has  been  so  often  described and  is  so  familiar  to  most  people,  that  it 
would  seem  almost  a  work  of  supererogation  to  give 
a  catalogue  raisonnee  of  its  component  parts.  The 
Paseo  we  visited  this  morning  is  called  "  El  Paseo  de 
Bucarelli,"  the  viceroy  of  that  name  having  planned 
it,  and  during  whose  government  it  was  completed. 
It  bears  the  same  family  resemblance  to  all  other 
Paseos,  Alamedas,  and  public  promenades  I  have 
already  mentioned  elsewhere.  The  different  species 
of  trees  growing  along  their  sides  being  the  chief 
points  by  which  one  may  distinguish  the  public 
walks  of  one  country  or  town  from  another :  thus,  at 
Havana  the  palm  tree  is  the  chosen  one ;  here  it  is 
the  pepper  tree,  a  native  of  Peru,  I  believe,  originally ; 
it  takes,  nevertheless,  kindly  to  this  soil,  and  though 
not  possessing  the  grandeur  or  majestic  bearing  of 
the  palm,  is  still  excessively  graceful  and  beautiful 
in  its  own  way.  The  leaves  are  of  a  dark  shining 
green,  and  the  fruit  or  pepper  berries  bright  scarlet. 
They  grow  in  bunches,  not  unlike  the  mountain  ash  in 
size  and  colour ;  but  instead  of  forming  one  large  head 
of  berries  like  it,  the  pepper  grows  like  bunches  of 
grapes,  hanging  downwards  like  them,  or  deciduously 
as  perhaps  you  would  say. 

E.  has  gone  with  the  Legation  to  a  bull  fight ; 
but  that  being  an  exhibition  I  have  never  been  able  to 
make  up  my  mind  to  witness  (unless  I  could  make 
sure  of  seeing  some  of  the  men  killed  who  so  cruelly 
torture  the  bulls,  and,  far  worse  still,  their  helpless 
and  courageous  horses),  I  have  profited  by  the  opportunity of  enjoying  a  tranquil  hour  or  two  in  writing 
to  you. 

Ever  yours  affectionately, 

C. 

