Mexico,  October  12th. — This  morning,  my  dear 
Father,  we  devoted  to  the  Paseo  de  las  Vigas  :  went 
by  one  road  and  returned  across  the  fields  by  another. 
Had  a  splendid  view  of  the  whole  valley  and  the  chain 
of  mountains  in  all  their  glory,  including  the  two 
volcanoes,  Popocatepetl  and  Iztaccihuatl ;  the  English for  the  latter  name  is  "  The  White  Lady."  Some 
say  it  was  called  after  the  beautiful  Indian  mistress 
of  Cortez,  Malintzin,  the  Malinche  hills  being  the 
group  of  which  Iztaccihuatl  is  the  chief.  Malintzin 
was  christened  soon  after  the  Spaniards  had  entered 
Mexico,  being  named  Marina,  and  it  was  as  Dona 
Marina  she  played  so  important  and  romantic  a  part 
in  the  history  of  the  conquest.  It  is  a  wondrous  love 
tale,  and  far  outstrips  in  its  unadorned  veracity  the 
imaginations  of  most  writers  of  fiction.  The  affection, 
so  sudden  in  its  growth,  yet  so  faithful  and  so  true, 
through  good  report  and  through  evil,  remained  unchanging to  the  end,  at  least  to  her  end, — that  is,  when 
she  was  married,  literally  disposed  of, — when  the  news 
came  that  the  legitimate  wife  of  Cortez  was  leaving 
Spain  to  join  him  in  the  new  world.  I  have  often 
speculated  on  what  Dona  Marina's  thoughts  and 
feelings  may  have  been  on  this  subject.  Did  she 
know  of  the  tie  which  bound  her  lover,  or  was  that 
tenet  of  the  Christian  faith  which  binds  husband 
and  wife  to  each  other  only  till  death,  left  untaught to  her,  when  she  threw  her  lot  with  Cortez, 
and  made  his  God  her  Grod  ?  And  then  when  the 
last  and  worst  trial  came  for  both, —  when  the  almost 
hated  but  still  lawful  wife  of  Cortez  appeared  on  the 
scene,  did  Marina  yield  to  persuasion,  entreaty, 
threats,  in  consenting  to  marry  another,  or  was  it  an 
expiation?  Did  she  hope  to  "bear  the  martyr's 
cross,  to  win  the  martyr's  crown  ? "  Quien  sabe ! 
But  it's  a  strange  tale,  and  would  make  a  fertile 
theme  for  the  romance  writer.  The  name  of  Dona 
Marina's  husband  was  Don  Juan  de  Jamarillo.  It  is 
rarely  found,  in  other  cases  bearing  any  resemblance 
to  this,  that  the  name  of  the  second  hero  should  be 
rescued  from  oblivion ;  but  this  certainly,  it  must  be 
owned,  was  an  exceptional  circumstance.  It  is  very 
provoking,  however,  that  from  the  time  of  her 
marriage  no  further  record  of  her  life  is  to  be  met 
with,  not  even  of  the  period  or  manner  of  her  death. 
Whether  she  was  happy,  or  miserable,  or  neither, 
but  "contented,"  tradition  sayeth  not:  only  the 
kindly  feeling  and  grateful  recollection  with  which 
even  to  this  day  her  name  is  mentioned  as  the  good 
angel  both  of  Spain  and  Mexico  in  those  stormy 
times.  To  return  to  our  promenade  after  this  flight 
of  imagination;  the  Paseo  de  las  Vigas  is  frequented during  part  of  the  year  (the  spring  and 
early  summer  from  March  till  May,  I  believe)  as  the 
fashionable  lounge  instead  of  the  Buccarelli ;  the 
chief  attraction  there,  consisting  in  the  drive,  being 
along  the  borders  of  the  canal.  While  the  Mexican 
beau  monde  disport  themselves  in  their  carriages,  or 
on  their  caracoling  horses,  the  picturesque-looking 
Indians  with  their  families  are  rowing  or  floating 
past  on  their  canoes  laden  with  flowers  and  fruit. 
At  all  times  this  must  be  a  pleasing  spectacle,  and 
even  now  as  we  witnessed  it  to-day,  though  not 
"the  season,"  the  coup  d'ceil  was  most  attractive. 
The  Indian  love  for  flowers  is  almost  a  religion ; 
and  the  way  in  which  they  decorate  not  merely  their 
persons,  but  every  object  they  employ  in  daily  life, 
with  these  natural  ornaments,  throws  a  halo  of 
beauty  and  romance  over  the  commonest  things. 
In  the  spring  and  flowering  time,  of  course,  the 
brilliancy  of  the  show  is  enhanced  tenfold ;  hence 
the  fashionable  season  for  las  Vigas  occurs  at  that 
period.  I  have  propounded  a  theory  !  Nothing  very 
abstruse ;  it  concerns  "  only  a  woman's  hair,"  that 
is  to  say,  the  way  of  dressing  it ;  but  it  seems  to  me 
that  the  mode  of  wearing  the  hair  plaited  en  couronne  round  the  head,  which  we  have  adopted  of 
late,  and  the  Italians  many  years  ago,  must  have 
been  of  Indian  origin.  How  the  Europeans  obtained it  would  be  another  fertile  field  of  argument, 
as  difficult  perhaps,  though  less  important  to  determine than  the  much  vexed  question,  whence 
the  traces  of  the  symbols  of  the  Christian  faith, 
which  have  been  found  in  Mexico  to  have  existed 
ages  before  the  existence  of  America  was  known  ? 
.  .  .  .  To  return  to  the  hair.  Every  Indian 
woman  you  meet,  whatever  may  be  her  calling  or 
occupation,  wears  her  hair  in  a  heavy  coil  or  plait 
across  the  head,  and  this  plait  is  invariably  studded, 
either  with  bright  coloured  flowers,  or  (and  this  is 
the  more  common  way)  interlaced  with  what  looks 
like  a  crimson  cord,  but  is  in  reality  the  long  leaf 
of  an  aquatic  plant  dyed  to  the  colour.  Talking  of 
costume,  I  took  advantage  of  a  short  interval  of 
leisure  to-day,  to  pay  a  visit  to  a  vendor  of  wax 
figures ;  for  the  manufacture  of  which  the  Mexicans 
are  so  famous.  You  would  most  likely  remember 
seeing  some  beautiful  specimens  at  the  Great  Exhibition. We  have  made  several  purchases,  as 
presents  for  home  friends,  though  I  greatly  fear 
they  will  get  broken  in  the  course  of  the  long 
journey  they  will  have  to  take.  One  of  the  women 
I  bought  represents  a  fruit  seller,  and  it  is  really 
wonderful  to  observe  the  minuteness  with  which  every 
single  article  in  her  basket  is  copied  from  nature. 
The  same  with  her  dress ;  every  stripe,  every  thread 
in  the  various  garments  she  wears,  is  to  the  life. 
My  man  is  a  pulque  seller,  with  the  sort  of  pipe  or 
cask  containing  the  delicious  beverage  on  his  back. 
He  wears  a  magnificent  serape,  silver  earrings, 
pointed  hat,  and  the  orthodox  double  pair  of  unmentionables, ornamented  down  each  "  limb  "  with  a 
row  of  silver  buttons.  Adieu,  now,  hasta  luego.  I 
am  getting  on  pretty  well  in  Spanish. 

Ever  your  affectionate, 
C. 