Fonda  de  los  Americanos,  Havana.  —  My  dear 
Father, — We  landed  here  yesterday,  and  I  resume  the 
narrative  of  my  progress,  although  this  sea  travelling 
is  such  an  easy  nonchalant  sort  of  life,  it  makes  one 
quite  idle,  but  as  the  weather  is  somewhat  hot  I  shall 
be  sorry  to  leave  the  sea  for  the  land  journey.  On 
the  19th  and  20th  we  coasted  along  San  Domingo 
and  Porto  Kico,  but  did  not  touch  at  either.  Early 
in  the  morning  of  the  22nd  the  lighthouse  of  Havana 
was  in  sight,  and  at  4  o'clock  P.M.  we  entered  the 
harbour.  I  had  heard  in  England  that  the  entrance 
to  Havana  was  a  scene  of  all  but  matchless  beauty ; 
this,  however,  I  think  is  exaggerated ;  very  beautiful 
it  truly  is,  and  the  immense  palm  trees  fringing  its 
shore,  give  it  a  character  peculiarly  its  own :  still  I 
think  the  ports  of  Naples,  Genoa,  and  above  all, 
Corfu,  may  successfully  vie  with  it  in  magnificence  of 
scenery.  We  were  very  nearly  being  obliged  to 
limit  our  acquaintance  with  Havana  to  its  harbour, 
and  having  to  go  on,  in  spite  of  ourselves,  to  Vera 
Cruz,  in  consequence  of  our  passport  not  having 
been  vise  by  the  Spanish  consul  at  St.  Thomas. 
The  police  were  inexorable.  "  We  must  go  on,"  at 
least  we  must  not  stay.  It  was  in  vain  we  assured 
them  we  were  not  conspirators,  or  worse  still,  Americans. We  were  not  en  regie,  that  was  certain,  so  we 
must  not  remain.  As  things  began  now  to  look  serious, 
I  thought  it  better  to  try  what  Senor  Isturiz's  letters 
would  do  ;  so  I  sent  the  one  to  the  Captain-general, 
writing  a  note  to  him  myself,  at  the  same  time  stating 
the  circumstances  and  our  dilemma.  In  the  mean 
time,  awaiting  his  reply,  we  went  on  shore,  as  that  is 
allowed  for  transitory  passengers.  Not  a  little  to 
my  relief,  and  I  must  confess  to  my  astonishment, 
the  Spanish  ambassador's  letter  had  a  most  magical 
effect.  To  begin  with :  the  Captain-general  sent  the 
royal  boat  to  bring  us  on  shore,  and  finding  we  had 
already  gone,  they  took  our  luggage,  consequently 
there  was  no  custom-house  searching,  as  on  ne  touche 
pas  a  la  Reine  or  her  conveyances.  The  next  surprise that  awaited  me  was  in  the  shape  of  an  aide-de- 
camp, dressed  in  full  scarlet  and  gold  (the  Spanish 
uniform  is  almost  the  same  as  our  Guards),  who  came 
charged  with  a  message  to  the  effect  that  the  Captain- 
general  himself,  and  all  that  he  had,  was  at  my  disposition. This  sounds  somewhat  wonderful  to  a 
stranger,  but  it  is  nevertheless  the  general  mode  of 
expression  used  by  the  Spanish  people  of  all  classes. 
If  you  remark  on  anything  belonging  to  them  in 
terms  of  praise,  they  say  immediately,  "  It  is  yours," 
or  a  su  disposition  de  usted :  at  your  disposal.  Of 
course  this  is  not  intended  to  be  taken  literally,  still 
it  is  a  courteous  and  kindly  phrase.  Having  replied 
to  the  aide-de-camp  in  as  civil  English  as  I  could 
muster,  we  proceeded,  it  being  now  about  eight 
o'clock,  to  the  Plaza  d' Armas,  a  large  square,  or 
rather  garden,  in  front  of  the  palace,  where  we  are 
told  a  military  band  plays  every  night.  But  we  were 
little  prepared  for  the  scene  that  awaited  us.  I  can 
liken  it  to  nothing  but  the  last  scene  of  some  fairy 
piece  at  a  play :  groups  of  glorious  palm  trees  standing in  bold  relief  against  the  glittering  starry  sky, 
the  moon  shedding  floods  of  light  on  the  spray  of  a 
fountain  playing  in  the  centre  of  the  Plaza ;  the 
flowers,  the  music,  and  then  the  women !  As  if  still 
further  to  heighten  the  resemblance  to  a  play,  or  I 
should  now  rather  say,  to  a  ballet,  the  senoras  and 
seiioritas  were  all  in  full  evening  costume ;  wreaths 
of  flowers  or  jewels  worn  by  all.  They  sauntered 
about  with  the  graceful  and  indolent  walk  peculiar 
to  the  Spanish,  and  flirting  both  with  their  eyes  and 
their  fans,  in  a  manner  which,  had  I  been  a  man, 
must  have  been  highly  detrimental  to  my  head  or 
heart,  or  both.  Still  I  do  wish  I  were  either  a  painter 
or  a  poet,  that  I  might  at  least  describe  my  impression 
in  something  better  than  this. 

23rd — Took  a  drive  this  morning  in  a  volante,  a 
species  of  carriage  peculiar  to  Havana,  a  most  curious 
affair,  and  difficult  to  describe. — A  cabriolet  body, 
placed  rather  low  and  forward ;  two  gigantic  wheels 
almost  at  the  back ;  traces  of  excessive  length  terminating with  a  horse,  mounted  by  a  diminutive  black 
postillion,  who  is  generally  equipped  either  in  green 
or  crimson  velvet  and  large  top-boots.  These  volantes  hold  two  persons,  and  sometimes  three ;  they 
are  very  comfortable  and  easy,  the  seat  being  so  well 
poised,  and  the  springs  quite  elastic.  We  wandered 
about  the  town  looking  at  the  outside  of  the  various 
buildings.  The  Moro,  or  lighthouse,  placed  on  a  steep 
rock  at  the  entrance  to  the  harbour,  nearly  grown 
over  with  the  bright  flowers  and  leaves  of  the  cactus, 
gives  great  beauty  to  the  general  coup  $ceil  of  the 
landscape.  The  palace,  the  prison,  the  new  operahouse,  called  the  Tacon,  from  Greneral  Tacon,  who 
built  it  during  his  vice-royalty  here ;  the  fort  of 
Santa  Clara,  the  Paseo  or  public  promenade,  and  the 
cathedral  (the  burial-place  of  Christopher  Columbus), 
were  principal  points  of  interest  in  our  drive  to-day. 
Bu£  as  at  present  we  are  here  only  en  passant  and 
mean  to  make  a  longer  stay  on  our  return,  I  shall 
reserve  till  then  any  more  detailed  account.  On 
coming  in  to  dinner  I  found  a  note  from  the  Captain- 
general,  hoping  we  would  do  him  the  honour  of 
attending  the  opera  at  night,  and  that  he  would  send 
his  carriage  to  convey  us  there  at  the  proper  time. 
Accordingly,  at  eight  o'clock,  a  very  pretty  barouche 
drove  up,  and  this  time  two  aides-de-camp  came  to 
escort  us,  and  in  about  ten  minutes  we  arrived  at  the 
Tacon  theatre,  and  were  ushered  into  the  royal  box. 
There  were  two  magnificent  chairs,  or  rather  thrones, 
with  the  crown  and  arms  of  Spain  carved  above  each. 
We  were  about  to  seat  ourselves  in  some  more  humble places,  but  were  told  the  Captain-general  had 
desired  we  should  fill  the  seats  of  honour  ;  so  recollecting Louis  XIV.'s  lessons  on  good  breeding,  on  a 
somewhat  similar  occasion,  I  thought  it  better  to  do 
as  I  was  told  without  further  demur,  though  for  a 
few  moments  I  could  not  help  feeling  nervous,  as 
every  pair  of  eyes  in  the  house  were  turned  upon  me. 
Soon,  however,  I  forgot  all  about  myself  in  wonder 
and  in  admiration  of  this  singularly  beautiful  theatre. 
All  the  boxes  are  open,  that  is  to  say,  the  occupants 
are  seen  from  head  to  foot,  which,  it  need  not  be 
said,  adds  much  to  the  fine  effect  of  the  whole,  the 
sides  and  fronts  of  the  boxes  being  delicately  carved 
in  open  gold  trellis-work.  The  ceiling  alone  is 
painted,  and  that  very  beautifully,  and  the  backs  of 
the  boxes  are  covered  with  fluted  silk  and  lace  draperies. Wrapped  in  contemplation  of  this  brilliant 
scene,  I  had  not  heard  the  door  open,  and  was  considerably startled  by  a  voice  at  my  ear  announcing 
the  speaker  "  was  at  my  feet."  I  speedily  got  upon
mine,  and  made  my  first  reverence  to  the  Captain- 
general,  and  was  about  taut  bien  que  mal  to  make  a 
Spanish  speech  to  him,  when,  to  my  great  relief,  he 
addressed  me  in  French ;  so  all  was  plain  sailing  then. 
Greneral  Canedo  is  a  fine  soldierly-looking  man, 
about  fifty  years  of  age,  not  handsome  in  face  (with 
the  exception  of  the  eyes),  but  with  a  kind,  benevolent expression,  a  good  voice,  and  a  thorough  gentleman, as  may  be  seen  at  a  glance.  The  opera  was 
changed  after  all  for  a  comedy,  in  consequence  of  the 
illness  of  one  of  the  singers. 

During  the  week  we  have  passed  here  whilst  waiting the  sailing  of  the  steamer,  we  have  gone  about 
Havana  and  its  environs.  The  Paseo  or  Alameda, 
the  place  where  the  Havanese  betake  themselves 
every  evening  for  riding  and  driving,  reminds  me 
rather  of  the  Champs  Elysees,  only  here  the  avenues 
and  plantations  are  all  of  palm  trees.  About  a  mile 
and  a  half  from  the  town  is  a  suburb  called  the 
"  Cerro,"  where  most  of  the  aristocracy  and  some  of 
the  merchants  have  country-houses,  or  "  Quintas,"  as 
they  are  called.  The  gardens  attached  to  these 
Quintas  are  delightful — a  wilderness  of  trees,  flowers, 
and  fruit.  We  passed  two  or  three  evenings  with  the 
Captain-general  at  his  Quinta,  played  billiards,  ate 
pine  apples,  and  sauntered  about  the  gardens.  He 
was  always  good-natured  enough  to  load  us  with 
flowers  when  we  returned,  and  such  beautiful  ones. 
I,  especially,  always  managed  to  get  a  beautiful  bunch 
of  stephanotis. 

Yesterday  morning  went  to  the  cathedral  to  visit  the 
tomb  of  Christopher  Columbus  ;  a  plain  marble  slab, 
with  a  short  inscription,  is  all  there  is  to  tell  of  him. 
I  cannot  understand  how  a  generous  and  noble- 
natured  people  like  the  Spanish  should  have  allowed 
the  remains  of  one  to  whom  they  owe  so  much  to  lie 
neglected  and  almost  forgotten.  That  he  should  be 
buried  here,  in  the  land  he  found  and  won,  is  right 
and  just,  as  well  as  in  accordance  with  his  own  d}dng 
wishes  ;  but  where  is  the  sculptured  monument? 
Where  the  glowing  epitaph  which  should  be  seen 
above  the  grave  of  Columbus? 
 