Mexico,  October  I&h. — Yesterday,  my  dear  Father, 
we  had  a  most  busy  day, —  a  regular  round  of  sight- 
seeing. First  of  all,  we  had  a  diplomatic  riding- 
party,  Spain,  France,  and  England  contributing  a 
representative.  Thus  escorted,  we  set  off  at  the 
early  hour  of  seven  in  the  morning  on  a  pilgrimage 
to  the  shrine  of  Nuestra  Senora  de  Guadeloupe, 
about  four  miles  distant.  This  Virgin  is  the  person 
who  does  everything  needful  for  Mexico  and  the 
Mexicans ;  consequently  she  is  held  in  great  esteem, 
and  many  are  the  offerings  dedicated  to  her.  We 
went  into  the  church,  but  did  not  linger  there  very 
long,  as  there  is  not  much  now  in  it  to  attract  or 
interest  strangers.  Formerly  the  altar  and  railing 
were  of  solid  silver;  but  now  that  is  all  changed. 
The  real  ore  has  been  melted  down,  and  in  its  stead 
there  is  now  but  a  tawdry  £m-looking  imitation. 
The  miraculous  picture,  which,  as  the  legend  relates, 
was  painted  in  one  night  by  the  Mater  Dolorosa 
herself  on  the  cloak  of  an  Indian  who  had  fallen 
asleep  enshrouded  in  its  folds,  we  looked  at  as  in 
duty  bound.  This  picture,  in  any  time  of  trouble 
or  need,  is  carried  about  in  public  from  church  to 
church,  by  way  of  reminding  the  heavenly  artist  of 
the  protection  she  volunteered  in  former  days  to 
Mexico.  The  principal  object  of  our  expedition, 
however,  was  the  view  from  another  chapel  on  the 
top  of  a  steepish  hill,  also  dedicated  to  the  Virgin. 
Here  we  were  amply  repaid  for  our  early  rising; 
everything  was  literally  couleur  de  rose,  bathed 
in  the  beautiful  early  sunlight,  the  air  soft  and  laden 
with  perfume.  There  is  here  close  to  the  chapel  a 
most  extraordinary  structure,  erected  by  a  Spaniard 
as  an  ex  voto  offering  to  the  Lady,  of  Gruedaloupe  for 
having  delivered  him  from  the  perils  of  shipwreck. 
It  is  made  of  brick,  or  something  that  looks  like 
brick,  and  is  in  the  shape  and  of  the  size  of  the 
mainsail  of  a  ship,  —  an  original  notion,  at  any  rate, 
though  the  effect  is  not  very  happy  in  the  execution. 
Cantered  back  to  breakfast  after  this  very  enjoyable 
excursion  with  good  spirits  and  rather  extra  good 
appetites.  Later  in  the  day  we  visited  the  Mint, 
and  saw  the  whole  process  of  making  and  coining 
the  dollars.  It  was  most  interesting  to  me,  as  it 
happened  I  had  never  seen  anything  of  the  sort 
before.  The  director  of  the  Mint  made  me  a  present 
of  a  dollar  that  I  had  seen  go  through  its  various 
transmutations.  On  leaving  this,  we  went  to  the 
Mineria,  or  school  of  mines.  It  contains  a  collection 
of  mineral  productions  of  various  kinds,  very  much 
like  all  other  such  assemblages,  only  not  quite  so 
good  as  most.  But  the  thing  to  be  seen  is  the 
palace  which  contains  them,  not  the  contents  themselves. It  is  a  wonderfully  beautiful  edifice — I  should 
imagine  on  the  model  of  the  Alhambra ;  the  Moorish 
arches  and  columns,  the  fountains  and  general  exuberance of  ornament,  is  quite  what  I  suppose  the 
Alhambra  to  be.  The  architect  of  this  Mexican 
chef  d'ceuvre  was  Tolosa.  We  next  proceeded  to  the 
University,  in  the  court  of  which  there  is  a  very  fine 
equestrian  statue  of  Charles  IV.  of  Spain.  The 
statue  is  of  bronze,  and  is  a  masterpiece  of  the  same 
sculptor ;  but  a  statue,  however  beautiful,  is  no  such 
uncommon  thing :  the  singularity  of  this  is,  that  the 
horse  is  represented  trotting  in  the  peculiar  manner 
the  Spanish  call  el  paso,  and  we,  I  believe,  call 
ambling ;  that  is,  the  fore  and  hind  legs  of  the  same 
side  advancing  together.  In  another  part  of  this 
courtyard  is  preserved  that  frightful  relic  of  barbarism, the  sacrificial  stone,  with  the  notch  cut  out  in 
it  for  resting  the  head  of  the  victim  while  he  was 
being  subjected  to  tortures  which  it  makes  one's 
blood  curdle  to  think  of.  The  sacrifice  was  to  propitiate the  gods  of  the  barbarians,  who  afterwards, 
to  please  themselves,  cooked  and  ate  the  remains. 
I  cannot,  after  reading  the  accounts'  which  have 
been  transmitted  to  us  of  these  horrors,  either 
pity  the  Indians  or  wonder  at  the  Spaniards  committing any  cruelties  upon  the  savages  when  they 
had  the  opportunity;  for  it  must  be  remembered 
that  on  many  occasions  when  the  fortune  of  war 
had  delivered  some  of  Cortez's  people  into  the 
hands  of  the  Aztecs,  they  were  put  to  death  with 
all  the  same  accessories  of  torment  as  those  sacrificed 
to  the  gods,  and  in  the  sight  and  almost  hearing  of 
their  comrades.  We  made  an  ineffectual  attempt  to 
see  the  Museum,  but  some  reparations  are  going  on 
which  will  keep  it  closed  for  another  week  or  so. 
We  obtained  access,  however,  to  the  Botanical  Garden 
which  is  attached  to  it.  The  state  of  neglect  into 
which  this  has  fallen  is  quite  melancholy.  I  suppose, 
because  Providence  has  allowed  everything  to  grow 
without  any  trouble,  the  people  consequently  will 
not  give  themselves  any.  We  had  a  gorgeous 
bouquet  presented  to  each  of  us,  including  floripundios,  white  and  red,  besides  many  other  beautiful- 
hued  flowers  of  which  I  do  not  know  the  botanical 
names  and  do  not  understand  the  Mexican;  but  I 
remarked  nevertheless  that  all  these  blossoms,  lovely 
as  they  undoubtedly  were,  were  of  the  most  ordinary 
description  in  Mexico,  every  cottage  garden,  or 
rather  what  would  answer  to  such  with  us,  containing 
them  all.  I  told  the  gardener  I  thought  he  had  a 
sinecure  and  employed  his  time  accordingly,  at  which 
he  seemed  much  affronted.  Concluded  this  busy 
day  with  a  dinner  at  the  Spanish  Embassy.  The 
present  envoy  of  Spain  to  the  Mexican  Kepublic  is 
the  Marquis  de  la  Eibera.  The  Captain-General, 
who  is  a  very  old  friend  of  his,  gave  me  a  letter  of 
introduction,  and  we  have  found  both  him  and 
Madame  de  Ribera  among  the  kindest  and  best  of 
the  many  friends  we  have  made  among  the  Spanish 
people.  The  Marquise  is  truly,  and  in  the  best  sense 
of  the  word,  "  a  charming  woman,"  uniting  the  most 
endearing  qualities  in  herself.  She  is  a  daughter  of 
the  Due  de  Eivas,  thereby  possessing  some  of  the 
best  blood  in  Spain. 