Real  del  Monte,  Oct.  1 5th,  11  P.M.  —We  left  Mexico 
at  six  this  morning,  on  our  way  to  the  far-famed  silver 
mines  of  Real  del  Monte.  We  had  engaged  a  diligence to  take  us  the  first  fifty  miles,  which  chiefly 
traverse  a  plain,  and  had  sent  on  our  horses  to  meet 
us  at  the  village  of  Haltepec,  together  with  our 
escort,  twenty-four  men  (mounted)  whom  Santa  Anna, 
acceding  to  the  request  Mr.  Doyle  had  made  in  our 
behalf,  kindly  granted  for  our  protection  against  the 
perils  of  the  route,  said  to  be  considerable  in  these 
parts.  The  officer  in  command  of  the  escort  travelled 
with  us  in  the  "waggon."  Just  as  we  arrived  at 
Haltepec,  a  divertissement  occurred  which  thoroughly 
disturbed  my  gravity  for  the  rest  of  the  journey. 
For  some  time  I  had  been  very  uncomfortable,  owing 
to  the  seat  of  the  carriage  being  so  high ;  my  feet 
could  not  reach  the  ground,  and,  after  sundry  attempts to  obtain  some  resting-place  for  them,  I  did 
at  last  touch  something  under  the  seat  opposite  to 
me ;  and,  finding  it  yield,  I  gradually,  with  the  aid  of 
both  feet,  drew  it  under  me  (apparently  it  was  a 
black  bag),  and  for  an  hour  or  two  enjoyed  a  considerable increase  of  comfort.  When  within  half  a  mile 
of  Haltepec,  as  I  have  said,  I  observed  "  our  Captain  " 
hunting,  fumbling,  and  peering  about  in  all  directions. At  last  he  approached  me,  and  on  stooping 
and  seeing  on  what  I  was  reposing  my  feet,  shall  I 
ever  forget  the  ludicrous  horror  depicted  on  his 
countenance  as  he  ejaculated  "  Santa  Maria  Purissima ! ! "  I  burst  into  a  violent  fit  of  laughter, 
when,  to  make  matters  better,  he  seized  my  ankles 
with  both  hands,  rudely  pushed  them  to  one  side, 
and  pointed,  for  he  was  past  speech,  at  the  black 
bundle  under  me.  Poor  man !  no  wonder  he  was 
terrified ;  the  bag  contained  a  pair  of  loaded  blunderbusses, and  I  had  cleverly  managed  to  turn  the 
muzzles  upwards,  and  pointed  to  myself.  It  was  a 
miracle,  certainly,  that  I  escaped ;  yet,  with  it  all,  the 
ridiculous  has  so  far  outweighed  the  dangerous,  that 
I  cannot  ever  think  of  it  for  a  moment  with  becoming 
seriousness.  We  remained  about  an  hour  to  refresh 
ourselves  at  Haltepec,  then  mounted  our  horses,  and 
set  forth  a  numerous  company;  but  the  weather, 
which  had  previously  been  fine  and  sunny,  suddenly 
changed,  and  we  were  caught  in  a  terrific  storm 
of  rain,  which  unfortunately  lasted  a  considerable 
time.  We  must  have  had  a  most  imposing  appearance as  we  galloped  into  the  little  village  of 
Pachuca.  About  thirty  people  we  were  in  all,  and 
the  escort,  at  least,  not  to  speak  of  ourselves,  looked 
exceedingly  picturesque, — the  graceful  sombreros,  the 
flowing  serapes,  and  last,  not  least,  the  thoroughbred-looking horses,  nearly  all  of  whom  in  this 
country  have  Arabian  blood.  We  made  a  grand 
entree  into  the  court-yard  of  the  hacienda,  wet  and 
dripping  as  we  were.  Here  our  staff  of  soldiers  left 
us,  after  receiving  our  sincere  thanks  for  their  safeguard ;  and  I  bad  adieu  to  my  frightened  Captain, 
who  had  not  recovered  from  his  attaque  de  nerfs,  I 
believe,  when  he  left  us.  We  now  proceeded  to 
ascend  the  hill  leading  to  Real  del  Monte.  The 
road  is  somewhat  barren,  the  maguey  and  the  prickly 
pear  being  the  only  vegetation  growing  near ;  but 
the  distant  mountain  scenery  is  wild  and  beautiful. Before  we  arrived  at  our  journey's  end  it  became bitterly  cold,  and  the  air  so  rarefied  that 
breathing  was  laborious.  This,  however,  is  no  great 
wonder,  as  Eeal  is  10,000  feet  above  the  level  of  the 
sea.  We  were  by  no  means  sorry  to  arrive  at  Mr. 
Auld's  house,  where  we  were  most  hospitably  welcomed by  him  and  Mrs.  Auld.  Mr.  Auld  is  the 
director  of  the  mines,  and,  I  believe,  a  shareholder. 
They  are  worked  and  managed  entirely  by  an  English company.  Indeed,  so  completely  English  is 
the  place  considered,  that  in  Mexico,  when  your 
friends  hear  that  you  contemplate  a  trip  to  Real  del 
Monte,  they  are  accustomed  to  observe,  "You  are 
going  to  England !  "  Certainly,  several  of  the  peculiarities of  our  manners  and  customs  were  visible 
immediately  on  our  arrival,  but  were  none  the  less 
welcome.  Perhaps  the  most  agreeable  of  all,  for  the 
first  impression,  was  the  sight  of  a  blazing  fire  in 
Mrs.  Auld's  drawing-room.  At  any  rate,  I  never  remember enjoying  one  so  much  even  in  England.  I 
hope  you  will  give  me  due  credit  for  my  determination in  sitting  up  to  write  to  you  at  this  time  of 
night,  for  I  am  very  tired  and  sleepy ;  but  as  I  anticipate being  still  more  so  to-morrow,  as  we  are,  I 
hear,  to  be  on  horseback  all  day,  I  am  afraid,  were 
I  to  delay  my  daily  chronicle  till  then,  I  might  forget or  omit  something  which,  nevertheless,  you  might 
like  to  know.  My  next  letter  will  most  likely  not 
be  written  till  we  are  back  again  in  Mexico,  but  I 
shall  jot  down  a  few  notes  en  attendant. 

Ever  your  affectionate, 
C. 