Mexico,  21  st.  —  We  are  once  more  here  again,  my 
dear  Father,  having  accomplished  our  English  expedition in  safety.  Altogether  the  excursion  has  been 
most  agreeable.  As  I  told  you  was  my  intention,  I 
took  notes  of  the  various  incidents  as  they  occurred, 
and  therefore  I  will  without  further  apology  tran- 
scribe them  tale  quale. 

16th. — Found  this  morning  that  our  poor  horses 
were  completely  knocked  up,  so  much  so  that  it  is 
doubtful  if  they  will  be  fit  for  work  again  for  many 
weeks  to  come,  even  if  they  are  then.  This  is  most 
vexatious,  as,  should  they  prove  unfit  for  service  as 
long  as  this,  I  shall  have  paid  *  601.  for  this  excursion 
alone,  as  the  horses,  with  their  saddles  and  accoutrements included,  cost  me  this  sum.  Mr.  Auld,  however, provided  us  with  steeds  from  his  stable  to-day, 
and  we  rode  to  Eegla,  once  the  residence  of  the 
Counts  of  Eegla,  the  owners  of  all  these  rich  mines. 
The  only  house  now  on  the  estate  is  a  hacienda 
(equivalent  in  English  to  a  farmhouse),  where,  on 
receiving  the  silver  out  of  the  mines,  they  work  and 
separate  it  from  the  earth  in  which  it  is  hidden,  and 
by  a  series  of  processes  which,  although  I  saw,  I 
should  fear  making  a  mistake  were  I  to  attempt  to 
describe  minutely,  they  finally  form  it  into  bars,  in 
which  state  it  is  forwarded  to  Mexico,  either  for 
coining  there  or  for  exportation  to  other  countries 
as  specie.  The  natural  beauties  of  Eegla  are  great ; 
indeed,  during  the  whole  of  our  ride  the  scenery  was 
charming.  The  hacienda  is  imbedded  in  a  hole,  to 
use  a  common  but  very  expressive  word ;  this  same 
hole  being  walled  by  two  gigantic  chains  of  rocks 
called  by  the  learned  basaltic  columns.  The  name 
given  them  here  is  the  "  Giant's  Causeway."  They 
are  most  curious-looking — resemble  the  barrels  of  an 
organ,  and  seem  much  more  as  if  they  were  made  by 
art  than  nature.  The  house  is  now  inhabited  by  the 
superintendent  of  the  company,  a  Mr.  Bell,  and  his 
wife,  from  the  north  of  England. 

18th. — Rose  at  four  in  the  morning,  and  were  in  our 
saddles  at  half-past  five  en  route  to  visit  a  famous 
barranca  and  see  from  it  the  sun  rise  over  the 
surrounding  mountains.  These  barrancas  are  like 
what  in  the  Alps  are  called  mountain  torrents,  only 
that  in  this  country  they  are  much  more  formidable 
and  much  larger;  they  seem  to  split  the  hills  asunder 
in  their  headlong  course.  From  the  spot  whence  we 
gazed  on  the  magnificent  view  unrolling  itself  beneath
and  around  us,  we  could  discern  in  the  distance  many 
of  these  wild  and  terrible-looking  chasms.  They  are 
now  dried  up,  but  in  the  rainy  season,  the  fury  of  the 
waters  dashing  down  these  rocky  channels,  and  carrying everything  away  with  their  irresistible  strength, 
it  is  neither  safe  nor  even  possible  sometimes  to 
approach  them.  We  returned  to  Eegla  to  breakfast, 
and  afterwards  took  leave  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bell,  and 
retraced  our  steps  home,  i.  e.  to  Eeal  del  Monte. 
Mr.  Auld  took  us  on  our  way  to  visit  a  hacienda, 
called  San  Miguel,  also  belonging  to  the  Count  de 
Regla,  a  most  beautiful  spot  imbedded  in  trees,  with 
a  fresh  clear  lake  in  the  midst  of  them.  The  whole 
scene  had  an  English  park-like  appearance,  the  wonderful flowers  only  excepted,  with  which  we  cannot 
vie.  At  the  hacienda  itself  they  are  employed,  as 
most  of  the  other  occupants  in  these  parts,  in  working 
the  silver  after  it  is  taken  from  the  mines,  adding 
the  quicksilver,  &c.,  and  making  in  a  fit  state  for 
transport. 

19th. —  Took  another  ride  on  horseback  through 
scenery  even  more  magnificent,  if  possible,  than  that 
of  the  barranca.  We  had  to  descend  a  very  rugged 
and  slippery  path,  and  when  we  reached  the  bottom 
we  were  nearly  swamped  in  bogs  with  which  the  ground 
is  covered  in  some  parts.  But  we  enjoyed  a  near 
view  of  some  grand  old  rocks,  which  form  the  greatest 
attraction  of  the  landscape,  and  which  are  named 
"  Las  penas  cargadas."  Dangerous  though  the  road 
was,  I  think  we  were  well  repaid  for  our  perseverance. 
We  saw  the  two  snow-capped  volcanoes  shining  in  all 
their  beauty.  I  had  no  idea  before  of  the  height  of 
these  two  mountains,  and  am  not  a  little  surprised  to 
find  they  both  overtop  Mont  Blanc  by  nearly  2000 
feet.  The  excessive  clearness  of  the  atmosphere  renders it  easy  to  deceive  the  eye.  Popocatapetl  and 
Iztaccihuatl  both,  but  especially  the  former,  look  as 
if  there  would  be  no  difficulty  whatever  in  riding  up 
to  the  top  in  a  couple  of  hours ;  yet  the  base  of  the 
nearer  of  the  two  is  forty  miles  off ! 

20th. — Went  into  one  of  the  silver  mines  called 
the  Kosario.  This  is  cut  through  the  side  of  the  hill, 
and  consequently  we  were  able  to  explore  it  without 
the  inconvenience  of  being  swung  down  in  baskets 
or  having  to  climb  up  rope  ladders.  We  were  sent 
in,  or  rather  drawn  in,  by  a  mule  in  a  sort  of  truck 
or  wheelbarrow,  in  which  we  lay  down  as  nearly  flat 
as  we  could,  with  candles  in  our  hands,  and  were  so 
trundled  on  for  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile.  We 
were  enveloped  from  head  to  foot  in  white  flannel 
drawers  and  gowns,  and  I  should  think  we  must 
have  looked  very  like  a  party  of  criminals  being  drawn 
to  execution.  The  Eosario  is  now  the  richest  of  the 
Real  del  Monte  mines  —  at  least  so  I  am  told.  The 
miners  seem  by  no  means  uncomfortable,  and  lead  a 
merry  life,  hammering  away  at  the  silvery  rock,  and 
singing  all  manner  of  songs,  comic  and  sentimental. 
They  gave  us  some  of  their  pulque  to  drink,  which 
this  time  we  did  not  think  so  bad.  We  also  obtained 
leave,  with  the  aid  of  a  chisel  and  hammer,  to  hew 
for  ourselves  some  specimens  of  the  ore. 

2lst. — Took  leave  of  our  hosts  at  Keal  del  Monte 
with  much  regret.  We  have  made  a  delightful 
excursion  and  a  most  agreeable  visit,  to  which  the 
only  drawback  has  been  its  brief  duration.  We  were 
obliged  to  leave  Mr.  Auld's  house  at  half-past  four 
o'clock  this  morning,  in  order  to  be  in  time  for  a 
diligence  which  was  to  pass  though  Pachuca  at  six. 
The  air  was  freezing :  I  don't  think  I  ever  suffered 
such  bitter  cold  before.  This  time  from  Pachuca 
we  availed  ourselves  of  the  "  silver  escort,"  as  some 
bars  were  being  sent  on  to  Mexico,  which  we  therefore 
accompanied.  Our  journey  was  accomplished  without any  remarkable  incident,  and  we  reached  the 
city  in  safety  this  evening.  The  weather  being  fine 
to-day,  I  was  able  to  observe  what  previously  had 
escaped  me  in  the  hurried  gallop  across  the  plain  in 
the  storm  —  namely,  the  numbers  of  large  aloes  or 
magueys,  as  their  Mexican  name  is,  scattered  in  profusion all  over  the  country.  Some  few  were  in 
flower,  but  they  are  rare,  as  immediately  the  owner 
finds  his  maguey  is  about  to  blossom,  he  cuts  its 
head  off  for  the  sake  of  the  pulque  which  is  then  in 
the  long  stem  ready  to  nourish  the  flower,  but  which 
more  generally  he  prefers  should  nourish  him. 

Ever  your  affectionate, 
C.