Mexico,  October  24th. — The  last  two  mornings,  my 
dear  Father,  have  been  almost  exclusively  devoted  to 
visiting  the  public  buildings,  churches,  &c.  On 
Sunday  we  went  to  the  College  of  the  Biscayunos,  a 
most  excellent  institution,  and  which  I  should  have 
much  regretted  leaving  Mexico  without  seeing.  The 
college  is  a  spacious,  airy,  and  handsome  edifice, 
modelled,  I  understand,  after  the  royal  palace  at 
Madrid.  The  founders  were  three  rich  old  Biscayans 
who  bethought  them  of  using  their  large  fortune  in 
this  charitable  manner.  The  college  is  for  the  benefit of  girls.  They  are  chosen  by  directors  or  trustees 
named  for  the  purpose,  and  the  preference  is  given 
in  election  to  those  of  Biscayan  birth  or  descent. 
When  once  elected  the  girls  are  taken  into  the 
college,  a  magnificent  and  extensive  building,  where 
they  receive  a  good  and  careful  education.  When 
grown  up  they  have  the  choice  of  three  things, 
namely,  to  marry,  to  go  into  a  convent,  or  to  stay 
where  they  are  as  teachers.  When  they  choose 
either  of  the  first  two  vocations,  they  are  dowried 
with  four  thousand  piastres.  The  internal  organisation of  the  establishment  is  curious.  They  are  divided 
into  little  governments  or  republics  consisting  of 
ten  members  in  each.  These  ten  possess  a  kitchen, 
a  salon,  and  a  dormitory  between  them.  They  do 
everything  for  themselves,  each  girl  in  rotation 
taking  her  turn  daily  at  the  different  employments. 
One  of  this  "  council  of  ten  "  is  appointed  president 
or  governor  for  a  month,  when  she  goes  out  of  office 
and  is  succeeded  by  another,  and  so  on.  The  system, 
I  understand,  works  admirably  in  every  respect.  On 
leaving  here  we  proceeded  to  the  Cathedral,  which, 
though  I  had  cursorily  visited  already,  I  wished  to 
go  over  again.  D'abord,  we  had  to  take  off  our 
bonnets  and  leave  them  in  the  carriage,  as  women 
are  not  allowed  to  enter  the  Mexican  churches  in 
either  bonnets  or  hats ;  so  we  substituted  scarfs  enveloping both  head  and  shoulders,  mantilla  fashion, 
and  so  entered.  The  interior  does  not,  at  least  now, 
correspond  with  the  grandeur  of  its  external  appearance ;  but,  like  many  other  things,  it  is  sadly  shorn  of 
its  ancient  glories.  There  is  still  a  great  deal  of 
silver  about  it,  and  the  pillars  near  the  high  altar  are 
curiously  enriched  with  many-coloured  marbles ;  but 
the  aisles  and  body  of  the  church  are  all  but  stripped, 
and  bear  visible  marks  of  popular  and  profane  touch. 
The  church  is  of  Gothic  architecture,  finely  shaped, 
and  of  immense  size.  Two  stately  towers  flank  the 
fapade  at  either  side.  Were  there,  however,  nothing 
attractive  either  in  sculpture  or  ornament,  the  Cathedral of  Mexico  must  always  possess  an  undying 
interest  for  the  antiquary,  and  indeed,  I  should  think, 
for  all  readers  of  history.  On  the  spot  now  hallowed 
by  the  Christian  church,  stood  once  the  temple 
dedicated  to  the  gods  of  the  most  revolting  and 
cruel  faith  that  ever  stained  the  annals  of  a  people 
since  the  creation  of  the  world, — the  Aztec  war- 
deity,  to  whom  this  temple  was  especially  devoted, 
and  in  whose  honour  whole  hecatombs  of  miserable 
human  victims  were  yearly  sacrificed.  The  present 
pavement  of  the  Cathedral  is  entirely  formed  of  the 
numerous  statues  and  busts  of  their  various  pagan 
deities,  notwithstanding  which  there  are  lots  still 
to  be  seen  at  the  Museum  and  elsewhere.  As 
we  left  the  building  our  attention  was  directed 
to  the  famous  Calendar  stone,  called  in  Mexican  slang 
"el  relox  de  Montezuma"  (Montezuma's  watch). 
In  the  days  of  the  Aztec  emperors  it  stood  in  the 
centre  of  the  Grand  Plaza,  but  has  since  been  transferred to  the  enclosure  by  the  Cathedral.  It  is  of 
circular  form,  and  of  great  size  and  weight  —  upwards 
of  fifty  tons,  I  am  told  —  and  is  inscribed  with  all 
manner  of  signs  and  hieroglyphics,  by  which  means 
they  formed  a  tolerably  accurate  computation  of  the 
lapse  of  time,  seasons,  &c.  Strange  that  such  civilisation  as  this  should  have  existed  at  the  same  period with  the  frightful  barbarities  before  mentioned  ! 
Being  now  in  proper  costume  for  church  visiting,  we 
took  the  opportunity  of  going  to  two  others — namely, 
San  Francisco  and  Santa  Clara.  The  former  is  one 
of  the  most  beautifully  ornamented  in  the  whole 
city.  Fine  sculptures  in  variegated  marble  are  to  be 
observed  all  around,  while  the  altar  glitters  with 
jewels  and  gold.  Santa  Clara  is  less  splendid,  but  in 
purer  and  better  taste ;  white  marble  columns  relieved with  gleams  of  gold  in  the  bas-reliefs.  We 
now  drove  a  few  miles  out  of  Mexico  to  see  those 
curious  relics  of  bygone  days  —  or  at  least  what  remains of  them  —  the  chinampas,  or  floating  islands. 
The  latter  term  is  certainly  now  a  misnomer.  They 
have  all  but  completely  attached  themselves  to  the 
continent  or  parent  soil.  In  two  or  three  instances 
only  a  kind  of  rivulet  or  stream  surrounds  them,  and 
allows  one  to  imagine  what  they  i>:ight  once  have 
been — flowery  sort  of  rafts  skimming  along  the  quiet 
surface  of  the  lakes.  I  should  suppose  that  the 
interwoven  aquatic  plants  which  originally  formed 
the  foundation  of  these  chinampas  must  have  thrown 
out  offshoots  and  branches  which,  in  process  of  time, 
encountered  others  from  the  mainland,  and  so  knit 
themselves  together  that  in  most  cases  the  residents 
on  the  soil  even  cannot  tell  where  the  mainland  ends 
and  where  the  islands  begin.  The  present  appearance  of  those  we  saw  resembled  patches  of  good  productive kitchen  garden,  but  lacked  the  wilderness  of 
flowers.  The  Museum  being  now  reopened,  we  went 
there  for  a  couple  of  hours  yesterday  morning. 
There  is  such  a  strong  family  likeness  in  all  museums, 
that  it  would  only  be  tedious  to  enumerate  any  portion of  the  contents  of  this.  Suffice  it  to  say,  therefore, that  here  are  the  usual  statues,  busts,  torsos,  &c., 
(f  supposed  to  be  "  of  everybody ;  bits  of  gold,  silver, 
copper,  iron,  lead,  and  all  the  known  metals  ;  spitted 
scorpions,  centipedes  and  spiders,  pickled  snakes  and 
stuffed  monkeys ;  also  a  series  of  portraits  of  the 
Viceroys  down  to  the  days  of  the  Republic.  One 
natural  curiosity  there  is  worth  all  the  other  objects, 
in  my  opinion.  This  is  (( el  arbol  de  las  manitas," — 
Anglice,  the  tree  of  the  little  hands, —  a  most  extraordinary plant.  The  flower  is  red,  and  in  shape 
something  like  an  anemone ;  but  from  it  there  protrudes a  singularly  correct  and  well-formed  hand, 
the  only  difference  between  it  and  the  human  member being  that  this  possesses  five  fingers  besides  a 
very  perfect  thumb.  There  are  now,  I  am  told,  but 
two  specimens  of  this  plant  remaining  in  Mexico  or 
in  the  world,  so  that  it  is  no  matter  of  wonder  to 
find  it  honoured  by  a  place  in  the  Museum.  Hence 
we  proceeded  to  the  church  attached  to  a  charitable 
institution  called  the  Hospital  de  Jesus.  Here  was 
the  last  resting-place  of  Cortez,  if  indeed  the  term 
rest  can  be  applied  to  aught  which  has  undergone  so 
many  changes.  After  being  transported  from  Seville, 
where  he  died,  here  to  the  land  he  won,  his  remains 
were  successively  interred  in  three  different  places ; 
at  Tezcuco,  at  the  church  of  San  Francisco  in 
Mexico,  and  lastly  at  this  place,  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth." 
To  the  disgrace  of  the  Mexican  mob,  on  the  occasion 
of  the  popular  outbreak  in  1823,  they  broke  into  the 
church  with  the  intention  of  desecrating  the  tomb 
and  destroying  the  remains  of  the  hero,  but  for 
whose  life  and  deeds  of  bravery  and  perseverance 
these  wretched  miscreants  could  not  have  called  the 
"  Queen  of  the  Valley  "  their  own  native  land.  Fortunately for  the  Mexican  reputation,  timely  warning 
was  conveyed  to  one  of  the  nobles  of  the  despicable 
project  of  the  rabble,  and  the  ashes  of  Cortez  were 
once  more  disinterred  and  conveyed  to  a  place  of 
safety.  But  where  that  is,  no  one  knows  but  the 
chief  actor  in  the  scene  and  his  family.  The  secret   
is  very  prudently  still  preserved,  as  the  general  good 
order  and  tranquillity  are  by  no  means  improving 
with  regard  to  Mexico  or  the  Mexicans.  In  the  evening we  attended  a  great  ball  given  in  the  Lonja  or 
Exchange  Eoom,  a  very  brilliant  affair.  Diamonds 
were  worn  to  an  amount  I  should  have  thought  incredible. I  was  chiefly  glad  of  this  ball  taking  place 
while  we  were  in  Mexico,  by  its  affording  me  an 
opportunity  of  seeing  and  having  time  to  examine 
the  President  Santa  Anna,  who,  with  his  young  wife, 
"  assisted  "  at  the  fete.  They  were  both  seated  on 
chairs  of  state  raised  on  a  velvet-covered  platform, 
and  were  surrounded  by  the  staff,  ministers,  corps 
diplomatique,  officers,  &c.  He  is  a  sallow-complexioned,  careworn-looking  man,  and  no  wonder.  I 
should  think  his  life  anything  but  an  easy  or  an 
enviable  one.  He  gives  me  the  impression  of  being 
a  man  of  strong  determination,  not  easy  temper,  and 
whose  will  it  might  be  dangerous  to  thwart.  Madame Santa  Anna  is  young  and  pretty  —  reported 
beautiful,  but  this  I  think  an  exaggeration ;  at  least 
she  disappointed  me.  Her  complexion  is  pale,  eyes 
and  hair  dark,  features  tolerable ;  but  this  sort  of 
face  is  no  uncommon  one.  She  is  of  low  birth,  but 
has  had  the  virtue  to  accept  Santa  Anna's  addresses 
only  on  the  condition  of  becoming  his  wife.  She 
pays  the  usual  penalty,  however,  for  marrying  a  man 
more  than  double  her  age,  in  becoming  the  object 
of  his  ever  watchful  jealousy  and  suspicion.  The 
dancing  continued  till  nearly  five  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  principally  the  "  Spanish  dances  "  so  called, 
a  kind  of  slow  floating  movement  to  a  sort  of  Sir 
Eoger  de  Coverley  figure.  Waltzes  and  polkas  were 
occasionally  interspersed  ;  but  the  truth  is,  no  lungs 
can  stand  quick  motion  through  the  air  here,  whether in  running  or  dancing  or  any  positive  self-
exertion  of  body :  the  atmosphere  being  so  rarefied, 
one  turn  of  a  waltz  sets  every  one  panting  as  if  they 
had  got  the  asthma.  So  the  Spanish  dances  are  likely 
to  maintain  their  supremacy  on  a  stronger  ground 
than  the  caprice  of  changeable  fashion. 