BEING  very  tired,  after  last  night's  dissipation,  we  con- 
tented ourselves,  this  afternoon,  with  a  ride  on  horseback a  few  miles  out  of  town,  where  we  were  quiet- 
spectators  of  a  very .  curious  scene,  viz.  a  sale  of 
horses,  which  had  to  be  caught  for  inspection  when 
chosen.  I  was  much  amused  and  interested  with  the 
whole  ceremony,  some  of  the  incidents  of  which  were 
most  laughable.  •  It  would  be  scarcely  possible  for 
an  uninitiated  person,  or  one  who  had  not  been  an 
eye-witness  of  the  performance,  to  understand  from 
a  description,  however  minute,  the  extraordinary 
skill  of  the  Mexicans  in  throwing  the  lasso.  I  think, 
perhaps  the  most  incomprehensible  part  is  the  apparent slowness  and  composure  with  which  it  gradually uncoils  on  its  route.  A  good  aim,  quickly  and 
suddenly  taken,  whether  with  a  stone,  a  ball,  or  anything else,  is  simple  enough ;  but  the  lasso,  to  all  appearance, aims  at  nothing.  I  repeatedly  saw — that 
is,  I  fancied  I  saw — the  treacherous  cord  unrolling 
itself  at  about  the  same  pace  as  the  horse  was  going.
keeping,  as  it  were,  alongside  of  him  until  the 
moment  decreed  by  fate  had  arrived.  Then  it  depended much  on  the  character  of  the  horse  what 
happened  afterwards.  If  he  was  of  a  philosophical, 
easy-going  turn,  his  pace  gradually  slackened,  and, 
without  any  violence,  he  was  brought  up  for  examination. If,  on  the  other  hand,  and  as  most  frequently happened,  he  resisted  the  indignity  of  being 
in  any  way  shackled,  he  speedily  measured  his  length 
on  the  ground;  yet  so  quietly  and  gently  withal,  that 
his  uppermost  feeling,  I  imagine,  must  be  astonishment even  more  than  rage.  It  is  certainly  an  exemplification of  the  old  saw  that  "practice  makes 
perfect."  The  men  here  practise  it  perpetually. 
The  lasso  is  an  indispensable  accessory  to  every 
saddle,  and  they  experimentalise  on  -everything.  Nothing comes  amiss.  Children,  too,  from  their  infancy, 
will  make  a  slip-knot  with  any  bit  of  string  they  can 
get  hold  of,  and  set  to  lassoing  their  chickens,  ducks, 
kittens,  puppies,  toys,  or  whatever  may  come  in  their 
way.  From  this  peculiarity,  as  may  be  supposed,  the 
existence  of  domestic  animals  does  not  flow  on  so 
easily  as  it  might  do.  I  have  often,  from  my  balcony 
here,  watched  and  laughed  at  the  distress  of  some 
maternal  hen,  and  the  clucking  indignation  of  pater- 
familias at  the  sudden  bereavement  of  one*  of  their 
progeny  by  the  whipcord  of  some  mischievous  urchin. 
The  trial,  to  be  sure,  is  of  short  duration  but  must
be  very  unpleasant  to  the  parties  concerned  for  the 
time  being.  I  have  also  profited  by  this  comparatively idle  day,  by  doing  a  little  Mexican  shopping ; 
that  is  to  say,  I  intended  to  do  so,  but  unfortunately 
I  find,  on  examination,  that  the  prices  of  the  articles 
I  particularly  desired  were  quite  beyond  my  portee. 
The  principal  object  of  my  ambition,  in  the  way  of 
personal  decoration,  was  a  genuine  Spanish  mantilla 
made  of  blonde,  either  black  or  white,  such  as  I  see 
les  grandes  dames  of  Mexico  are  in  the  habit  of 
wearing ;  but  on  selecting  one  which  pleased  me,  and 
inquiring  its  price,  I  heard,  to  my  consternation,  that 
it  amounted  to  200  dollars,  i.  e.  upwards  of  40L  So, 
as  anything  like  that  sum  was  out  of  the  question, 
I  ceased  to  think  any  more  about  it.  I  have,  how- 
ever, succeeded  in  obtaining  two  very  handsome 
specimens  of  the  Mexican  "  serape,"  which  I  shall 
send  to  you  the  first  opportunity,  or,  if  none  presents 
itself,  I  shall  keep  and  bring  home  with  me.  They 
are,  at  all  events,  uncommon,  and  not  to  be  seen 
every  day.  The  only  thing  against  them  is,  that 
though  they  will  make  capital  railway  wraps,  and 
effectually  preserve  you  from  both  dust  and  cold, 
they  are  so  singular  in  form,  and  the  colours  so  many 
and  so  brilliant,  that  I  almost  fear  you  might  render 
yourself  liable  to  be  taken  up,  or  mistaken  for  the 
Pope  or  the  Sultan,  or  some  equally  mischievous 
person.  I  have  also  bought  two  or  three  silver 
brooches,  principally  used  by  the  Mexicans  to  fasten 
their  sombreros,  or  rather  the  feathers  or  ribands 
they  may  wear  in  them.  These  brooches  are  specially 
interesting  as  bearing  for  their  design  the  national 
emblem,  namely,  an  eagle  flying,  wings  extended, 
and  carrying  in  his  claws  a  large  branch  of  the  nopal  or 
prickly  pear.  These,  together  with  a  Mexican  riding 
whip  and  some  valentines  (oddly  enough,  they  have 
the  custom,  though  not  the  day,  here ;  and  whereas 
we  make  ours  the  14th  of  February,  they  make 
theirs  on  the  day  we  devote  to  geese,  the  29th  of  September), are,  I  think,  all  the  extravagances  of  which 
I  have  been  guilty.  This  letter,  I  see,  has  extended 
itself  to  a  most  unconscionable  length ;  therefore,  as  I 
do  not  wish  to  ruin  you  in  postage,  I  shall  now  conclude, and  remain 

Your  ever  affectionate 

C. 
