Mexico,  Oct.  26th. — My  dear  Father, — This  will,  I  fear 
be  the  last  or  nearly  the  last  letter  you  will  receive 
from  me  dated  Mexico,  for  the  time  of  our  departure 
is  now  drawing  very  near.  The  actual  day  is  not  yet 
fixed,  as  it  will  greatly  depend  upon  circumstances, 
about  which  I  will  tell  you  when  all  is  finally  arranged and  I  know  myself  what  our  movements  will 
be.  Yesterday  we  went  to  Tacuba,  the  ancient 
Tlacopan,  and  the  spot  to  which  Cortez  retreated 
after  the  first  great  reverse  that  befel  the  Spanish 
arms  after  the  conquest.  We  followed  step  by  step 
the  same  path  taken  by  the  routed  troops  on  that 
"  noche  triste,"  or  sad  night,  and  lingered  for  a  few 
minutes  at  the  scene  of  the  famous  leap  of  Alvarado, 
who,  finding  himself  cut  off  from  all  hope  of  retreat, 
alone  against  countless  enemies,  took  the  desperate 
measure  of  planting  his  lance  firmly  in  the  bottom 
of  the  stream,  and  by  its  aid  swung  himself  across  a 
prodigious  distance  out  of  reach  of  his  assailants. 
There  is  at  Tacuba  now  a  small  field  with  some  old 
trees  and  flowering  rose-bushes.     Under  one  of  the 
former,  called  by  his  name,  Cortez  is  said   to  have 
passed    the    dark    hours    of  that   dreary   night.     I 
gathered  a  bunch  of  the  roses  to  keep  as  a  souvenir 
of  the  spot  for  my  own  satisfaction  ;  but  for  a  narration of  this  most  extraordinary  and  romantic  *  episode 
in  the  history  of  those  days,  it  would  be  the  height 
of  presumption  in  any  one  to  attempt  it  after  the 
account  given  in  the  incomparably  eloquent  pages  of 
Prescott.     Spent  the  evening  with  the  same  friends 
whom  we  visited  at  Tacuba  some  weeks  ago,  and 
who  have  now  come   into  Mexico   for   the  winter. 
Had  tea  a  V  Anglaise,  and  what  was  far  better,  at 
least  for  a  change,  chocolate  a   la  Mexicaine.      It 
would    be   impossible    to    imagine    anything    more 
delicious  in  its  way  than  chocolate  as  they  prepare 
it  in  this   country.     Without  of  course   instancing 
England,  where  by  asking  you   get  a  cup  of  what 
is  libellously  called  chocolate  and  in  taste  approximates to  toast  and  water  mixed  with  sky-blue  milk 
and  sweetened  with  syrup,  I  will  compare  the  chocolate 
here  with  what  is  given  you  in  France,  where  they 
flatter  themselves  they  understand  the  beverage ;  yet 
I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  even  the  French 
know   nothing   about   the    matter.      In    the    more 
absorbing  attraction  of  other  incidents  of  our  journey 
between  Vera  Cruz  and    this   city,  I  find    I   have 
been  ungrateful  enough  to  omit  any  mention  of  the 
sustenance  afforded  us  by  the  chocolate,  always 
found  in  perfection  and  in  plenty  at  the  poorest  and 
humblest  huts  on  the  road.  I  remember  particularly, 
on  the  occasion  I  have  already  mentioned,  when,  in 
the  middle  of  a  cold,  rainy,  stormy  night,  our  diligence stuck  fast  in  some  of  the  deep  ruts  abounding 
in  the  way,  we  entered  what  appeared  to  be. nothing 
better  than  a  hovel  of  the  most  miserable  description. 
The  inside  did  not  either  at  all  belie  the  promise  of 
the  out.  In  one  room,  or  rather  portion  of  space, 
unpartitioned,  were  sleeping  a  man  and  woman,  two 
children,  two  goats,  a  pig,  a  parrot,  a  cat,  a  lot  of 
poultry  roosting  in  the  oddest  places,  and  dogs  ad 
libitum;  besides  dried  fruit,  vegetables,  meat,  &c., 
hanging  from  the  rafters  on  the  roof.  It  might  be 
naturally  supposed  that  in  a  place  of  this  description 
one  would  find  nothing  superexcellent  in  the  way  of 
cuisine;  and  yet,  within  ten  minutes  of  our  unlooked-for entree  in  their  cabin,  these  hospitable 
Indians  produced  a  potful  of  hot  chocolate,  the  like 
of  which  I  would  challenge  all  Paris  to  equal.  To 
return  to  our  friend's  soiree  after  this  digression  :  we 
occupied  our  evening  in  playing  vingt-et-un,  which,  by 
the  way,  is  the  general  nightly  amusement  here,  and 
much  more  resorted  to  than  dancing  —  I  suppose  for 
the  reasons  I  mentioned  in  describing  the  Lonja  ball. 
This  morning,  Eleanor  not  being  actively  inclined,  I 
rode  with  Mr.  Berkeley  to  San  Augustin,  a  village 
some  eight  miles  from  here,  which  is  actually  devoted 
to  no  other  purpose  than  that  of  gambling.  Curious 
country  and  still  more  curious  government,  where 
the  existence  of  such  a  state  of  things  as  an  institution is  permitted !  The  gambling  fetes  for  this  year 
are  over  now  (they  take  place  in  June) ;  but  though 
for  the  present  deserted,  my  cicerone  pointed  out  to 
me  the  various  houses  where  so  many  fortunes  change 
hands,  besides  describing  to  me  the  details  of  what 
takes  place,  he  having  been  a  visitor  annually  for 
some  time  past.  The  principal  and  favourite  game 
is  "  Monte,"  which,  as  far  as  I  can  make  out,  differs 
very  little  if  at  all  from  Lansquenet ;  but  the  merry- 
making once  begun,  both  sexes,  all  ranks,  the  young 
and  the  old,  the  rich  and  the  poor,  crowd  to  San 
Augustin,  and  play  with,  against,  and  beside  each 
other.  I  am  sorry  to  add  that  the  affections  of  this 
heterogeneous  multitude  are  equally  divided,  or 
nearly  so,  between  Monte  and  a  far  more  inhuman 
amusement,  namely,  cock-fighting ;  the  slaughter  of 
these  poor  innocents  at  the  annual  fetes  amounts  to 
something  enormous,  the  fashion  of  fastening  sharp 
knives  to  their  spurs  preventing  any  chance  of  preserving their  lives,  with  very  few  exceptions.  An 
absurd  story  is  told,  and  I  believe  well  authenticated, 
of  the  President  Santa  Anna,  whose  excessive  love  for 
cock-fighting  once  led  him  into  most  irreverent  and 
uncourteous  behaviour  to  a  Mexican  bishop.  The 
latter  had  gone  to  call  on  Santa  Anna  by  appointment, but  the  conversation  had  scarcely  begun  when 
the  President  started  up  and  left  the  room.  The 
reverend  padre  waited  for  some  time  patiently,  then 
wonderingly.  At  length  he  rang  the  bell,  and,  in 
answer  to  his  inquiries,  was  told  that  Santa  Anna 
"  had  gone  to  visit  a  sick  friend."  "  Who  ?  "  "Silver- 
tail."  "Who  is  Silvertail?"  "His  excellency's 
favourite  gamecock,  who  was  wounded  in  a  fight  this 
morning ! " 