October  28th.  —  This  is  our  very  last  day  in  Mexico, 
my  dear  Father.  I  therefore  yield  to  the  temptation 
of  dating  yet  one  more  letter  from  it,  though  pro-bably my  despatch  will  not  be  closed  till  we  are  some 
way  on  the  return  route.  We  shall  reach  Vera  Cruz 
some  days  before  the  steamer,  but  by  taking  our 
departure  now,  although  it  is  a  little  premature,  we 
shall  have  the  double  advantage  of  an  escort  the 
whole  way,  and  also  we  shall  enjoy  the  company  of 
our  friends  the  Eiberas.  Madame  de  Eibera  is  going 
to  Europe  with  her  child,  and  Monsieur  accompanies 
her  as  far  as  Vera  Cruz,  where  a  Spanish  man-of-war 
awaits  her  embarkation.  The  whole  of  this  afternoon 
has  been  occupied  in  preparations  for  our  journey  and 
in  receiving  numerous  farewell  visits.  "We  have  found 
many  good  friends  here  from  whom  we  shall  separate 

with  great  regret Yesterday  morning 

at  a  very  early  hour  we  left  Mexico  on  an  expedition 
to  a  place  called  "  El  Desierto,"  anglice,  the  desert. 
Why  so  called  it  would  be  difficult  to  determine,  for 
nothing  could  very  well  be  more  unlike  our  general 
notions  of  a  desert.  It  is  about  fourteen  miles  from 
Mexico.  For  the  first  time  I  thought  the  view 
to-day,  as  we  gradually  approached  our  destination, 
fully  equalled  the  description  of  the  valley  given  by 
so  many  chroniclers,  from  Cortez  to  Humboldt. 
Hills,  valleys,  lakes,  and  mountains  outvied  each 
other,  shining  under  a  purple  sky,  and  almost  realised the  dreams  of  the  olden  time.  We  left  our 
carriage  at  the  village  of  Toluca,  and  shortly  after 
commenced  the  ascent  of  a  steep  hill  leading  to  the 
"  desierto."  It  was  formerly  a  monastery,  but  is 
now  used  as  a  glass  manufactory.  Every  step  we 
took  disclosed  views,  the  one  only  more  exquisitely 
beautiful  than  the  other.  Much  as  I  have  seen  to 
admire  and  to  enchant  in  this  wonderful  country,  this 
day's  excursion  has  surpassed  all.  It  was  decreed  by 
the  fates  that  we  should  not  return  without  an  adventure ;  for  we  had  no  sooner  begun  to  wend  our 
way  down  the  little  path  leading  back  to  Toluca,  than 
the  most  violent  storm  of  tropical  rain  that  can  be 
imagined  burst  over  our  heads.  It  really,  as  they  say 
in  Yorkshire,  "  came  heaven  down."  We  were  wet 
through  in  two  minutes ;  but  this  was  not  the  worst 
part  of  the  business.  The  ground,  which  had  previously been  parched  and  burnt  from  a  long  continuance of  dry  weather  now  became  so  slippery  with 
the  rain,  which  had  glazed  more  than  soaked  the 
soil,  that  it  was  quite  impossible  to  keep  one's  footing at  all ;  and  so  slipping,  sliding,  stumbling  and 
falling,  we  pursued  our  downward  course.  However, 
"  all's  well  that  ends  well ;"  we  did  arrive  at  last,  drove 
home,  and  happily  accomplished  our  expedition 
without  even  catching  cold.  This  morning  we  took 
our  last  ride  on  horseback;  went  to  see  the  tree 
hallowed  by  the  "  noche  triste."  . 

Puebla,  Oct.  29th. — I  resume  my  letter.  We  reached 
here  about  an  hour  ago.  We  had  to  get  up  at  a 
dreadful  hour  this  morning,  starting  at  four  o'clock ; 
cold  and  miserable,  and  so  we  bid  a  sad  farewell  to 
Mexico.  Our  companions  are  Monsieur  and  Madame de  Eibera,  their  little  boy,  and  a  wonderful 
old  woman,  upwards  of  seventy,  who  is  returning  to 
Spain  after  having  passed  her  whole  life  from  the 
age  of  sixteen  in  Mexico.  Some  one  of  her  relations- 
has  died  and  left  her  a  fortune  in  her  old  age.  So 
she  is  now  about  to  go  and  end  her  days  in  her 
own  country.  Not  a  wise  plan,  I  think,  as  she  is  far 
too  aged  to  find  old  or  make  new  friends  now  in  old 
Spain,  whereas  she  leaves  the  ties  and  associations  of 
half  a  century  behind  her.  Madame  de  Eibera  was 
nursing  with  tender  care  two  extraordinary  little  dogs 
of  the  Chihuahua*  breed.  They  are  at  present  only 
in  their  early  puppy-hood,  and  are  of  the  size  of  very 
small  kittens ;  but  their  full  growth  scarcely  attains 
that  of  a  common  domestic  cat.  Most  marvellous 
tales  are  told  concerning  the  manners  and  customs  of 
this  race  of  canines,  for  the  truth  of  which  of  course 
I  cannot  vouch,  knowing  nothing  of  the  matter.  They 
say  these  dogs  are  met  with  in  and  surrounding  the 
Chihuahua  part  of  Mexico ;  that  their  organisation 
is  a  sort  of  "  United  States  "  in  miniature,  only  that, 
with  the  quadrupedal  republic,  they  have  the  advantage of  a  "  president  "  to  each  state,  and  that  president 
is  —  a  rattle  snake  !  They  are  said,  nevertheless,  to 
live  in  a  state  of  exemplary  order  and  felicity,  a  kind 
of  Utopian  mixture  of  free  trade  and  protection,  the 
former  consisting  of  a  course  of  (s  trading  "  carried  on 
by  the  dogs  in  a  manner  more  free  than  welcome,  and 
the  latter,  as  may  be  guessed,  afforded  by  the  snakes 
on  principles  which  Mr.  Cobden  himself  I  imagine 
would  accede  to.  Unlike  political  parties,  however, 
there  exists  honour  among  thieves  here.  The  dogs 
forage  for  the  snakes,  as  well  as  themselves,  and  the 
snakes  in  their  turn  defend  the  dogs  from  all  adversaries, and  do  not,  according  to  the  manner  of 
"  liberals  "  and  "  conservatives,"  desert  their  friends. 
Madame  de  Eibera's  little  charges  are  amusing  and 
affectionate  little  things,  not  old  enough  yet  to  have 
felt  any  filial  affection  for  their  formidable  parent. 
I  nursed  one  all  the  way,  it  having  ensconced  itself 
very  comfortably  in  my  neck,  between  my  bonnet  and 
cloak.  Among  other  methods  of  whiling  away  the 
long  hours  of  our  journey,  I  derive  great  amusement, 
besides  instruction,  in  the  Spanish  language  by  listening to  the  prattle  of  the  young  Ribera,  a  fine  merry 
child  of  about  seven  years  old.  True  Castilian  is  undeniably the  queen  or  empress  of  languages,  and  from 
the  lips  of  a  child  sounds  peculiarly  beautiful.  Soft, 
without  the  namby  pamby  drawl  of  Italian,  grand, 
without  the  harshness  of  German,  and  brilliant,  without the  sharpness  of  French.  One  expression  particularly amuses  me  in  this  little  fellow:  when  he 
differs  in  opinion  with  his  father,  or  means  to  remonstrate with  him,  he  exclaims,  in  such  a  dignified 
manner,  "  Hombre  !  "  It  is  a  very  common  Spanish 
expression,  and  means  a  great  deal,  though  its 
literal  translation  is  merely  "  man !  "  which  sounds 
odd  enough  from  a  child  to  his  father ;  but  it  is  equivalent to  a  long  English  sentence :  for  instance,  "  But, 
my  dear  Sir,  I  assure  you,  you're  quite  wrong ;  only 
reflect  for  a  moment,"  &c.,  would  all  be  expressed  by 
the  Spanish  "  Hombre  !  " 

