PUEBLA. 

WE  have  passed  over  the  same  ground  as  in  coming, 
only  that  we  reached  here  earlier  in  the  day,  and 
consequently  have  had  an  opportunity  of  judging  a 
little  more  of  the  town,  which  is  remarkably  handsome, and  of  visiting  the  cathedral.  This  is  a  most 
beautiful  edifice,  far  superior  in  all  respects,  I  think 
(size  excepted),  to  that  of  Mexico.  The  church  was 
so  quickly  built  that  tradition  says  the  workmen 
were  helped  by  angels,  who  came  by  night  and 
advanced  their  work.  Hence  the  name  by  which 
Puebla  is  distinguished,  namely,  "  Puebla  de  los 
Angeles."  ...  A  few  hours  after  penning  the 
above  lines,  we  again  set  out  on  our  journey,  another 
night  and  part  of  a  day  bringing  us  to  Perote,  which 
looked  much  less  dismal  than  on  our  first  visit.  We 
had  the  loveliest  view  ever  since  daybreak  of  the 
two  Mexican  volcanoes,  and  towards  the  close,  in-  the 
glorious  light  of  the  setting  sun,  Orizava  burst  upon 
our  sight.  Next  morning,  in  due  course  of  time,  we 
reached  beautiful  Jalapa  again.  The  scenery,  trees, 
and  flowers  seem  to  me  even  more  wonderful,  if  possible, than  on  my  first  visit.  Nothing  I  have  ever 
seen,  heard,  or  read  of  has  equalled  this  in  colouring. It  is  quite  indescribable,  and  would  only  seem 
to  be  exaggeration  were  I  to  attempt  to  render  the 
impression  the  whole  scene  leaves  on  the  mind  and 
memory. 

We  remained  the  whole  day  at  Jalapa,  reserving 
the  uninteresting  Tierra  Caliente  between  it  and 
Vera  Cruz  for  traversing  at  night.  Having  refreshed 
ourselves  with  an  excellent  dejeuner  a  la  fourchette, 
we  took  a  long  walk  with  our  friends  into  the 
country,  and  returned  laden  with  floripundias  and 
roses.  On  our  way  back  we  entered  some  of  the 
cottages  scattered  around.  In  one  of  these  we  unexpectedly came  upon  a  most  interesting  group.  A 
picturesque-looking  young  Mexican  playing  the  guitar 
and  singing  to  his  lady- love  ;  she,  the  while  occupied 
in  twining  bright  flowers  in  her  hair!  I  thought 
those  days  of  romance  had  gone  by;  and  so  they  have 
in  the  mother  country,  since  "  Cervantes  laughed 
Spain's  chivalry  away ; "  but  here  they  are  less 
civilised !  Another  night  ended  our  land  journey 
without  any  accident,  and  brought  us  to  Vera  Cruz, 
whence  I  am  at  this  moment  writing  (Nov.  6th), 
having  arrived  here  three  days  ago.  We  have  had 
a  most  unexpectedly  pleasant  sojourn  at  Vera  Cruz. 
It  certainly  exemplifies  the  truth  of  the  proverb 
about  giving  a  dog  a  bad  name.  This  much  maligned 
town  has  the  reputation  of  being  dull,  dismal,  and 
disagreeable  in  every  respect,  and  we  anticipated 
spending  our  three  or  four  days  of  detention  about 
as  profitably  as  if  we  had  been  in  quarantine ; 
whereas,  thanks  partly  to  Mr.  GKffard  (the  consul), 
who  has  introduced  us  to  some  friends  of  his  residing 
here,  we  have  had  riding  horses  placed  at  our  disposition by  different  people  each  day,  and  have 
enjoyed  ourselves  exceedingly.  As  soon  as  the  town 
and  the  immediately  surrounding  sands  of  Vera  Cruz 
are  passed,  you  enter  into  the  most  charming  country 
scenery  in  the  world.  We  cantered  about  for  miles 
over  green  turf,  and  through  green  lanes  and  leafy 
glades  worthy  of  England  itself.  Indeed  I  was  quite 
forcibly  reminded  of  Wonersh,  only  that,  besides  all 
the  beautiful  green  verdure  to  be  seen  there,  flowers 
grow  here  such  as  England  dreams  not  of.  An  odd 
adventure,  which  might  have  proved  a  catastrophe, 
occurred  to  us  yesterday.  An  old  Mexican  gentleman, Senor  Gr ,  had  begged  to  be  chosen  purveyor 

of  our  steeds  for  the  day,  and  accordingly  at  3  o'clock 
two  magnificent  looking  horses  were  at  our  door. 
They  did  not  seem  pleased  at  our  mounting,  but  that 
we  thought  nothing  of,  and  all  went  well  till  we  were 
outside  the  town  gates,  on  the  sand-hills  immediately 
surrounding  them.  Here  our  horses  began  to  perform. Eleanor's  bolted  at  once,  and  she  threw  herself 
off,  very  fortunately  clearing  the  saddle,  and  as  she 
fell  on  soft  sand  was  not  hurt.  My  steed  meanwhile began  to  plunge  in  the  most  frightful  manner 
I  ever  saw ;  but  I  was  afraid  to  throw  myself  off,  so 
on  him  I  sat,  till,  suddenly,  the  saddle  turned  round 
and  I  fell.  By  great  good  luck  the  horse  made  a 
great  bound  off  without  touching  me,  so  I  was  quitte 
pour  la  peur ;  and  after  all  we  managed  to  get  our 
ride  not  on  these  bucephali,  but  on  a  couple  of  steady 
"  sage  "  ponies  lent  us  by  some  one  else.  But  the 
cream  of  the  incident  was  this.  The  old  gentleman 
on  being  questioned  on  the  subject,  very  coolly  said, 
"  No  one  had  ever  mounted  these  horses  before,  but 
that  he  had  always  understood  it  to  be  a  matter  of 
indifference  to  English  women  what  ( wild  beasts ' 
they  rode ! "  I  must  now  bring  my  last  Mexican 
letter  to  a  close,  though  we  shall  travel  to  Havana 
together ;  but  as  the  vessel  will  only  remain  there  a 
few  hours,  I  probably  should  not  have  time  to  write 
on  arriving  there.  So  adieu, 

Your  ever  affectionate 
C. 