Havana,  November  llth. — My  dear  Father,  —  We 
embarked  on  the  same  evening  on  which  I  closed  my 
letter  at  Vera  Cruz.  A  furious  "  norte  "  blowing,  I 
thought  we  should  have  been  swamped  several  times 
before  reaching  the  steamer.  The  waves  dashed  all 
over  us,  and  we  were  completely  drenched  when  we 
at  length  arrived.  The  gale  became  worse  as  the 
day  wore  on,  and  at  last  the  shore  boats  asked  a 
hundred  dollars  for  bringing  or  taking  any  one  from 
the  land  to  the  vessel  or  vice  versa.  These  "  nortes" 
or  northerly  gales  are  the  terrors  of  the  Mexican 
Gulf.  They  come  on  generally  without  any  warning, 
and  like  the  Provenpal  mistral,  they  last  either  three 
or  nine  days,  and  cause  for  the  most  part  great 
damage,  besides  doubly  adding  to  the  dangers  of  the 
Alacranes.  Unfortunately  our  gale  was  one  of  the 
nine  days'  duration,  consequently  we  have  had  a  long 
and  most  disagreeable  passage  —  rough  sea,  bad  ship, 
and  worse  accommodation.  The  Avon  is  the  name 
of  the  packet  and  as  far  as  I  have  yet  seen  it  is 
the  only  really  bad  and  uncomfortable  one  in  the 
West  India  service.  You  may  imagine  under  these 
circumstances  what  a  relief  it  was,  to  make  Havana  at 
last,  to  see  the  dear  old  "  ace  of  clubs  "  again  (i.  e.  the 
harbour  of  Havana  which  is  shaped  exactly  like  one), 
and  to  meet  our  good  Spanish  friends  once  more. 

1 5th.  —  Yesterday  evening  we  dined  at  the  Quinton  with  the  captain-general,  and  met  a  large 
party  of  hidalgos  and  official  grandees,  with  their 
senoras  and  senoritas ;  that  is,  in  more  humble  words 
than  the  grandiloquent  Spanish,  their  wives  and 
daughters.  I  suppose  it  is  in  consequence  of  so  little 
being  heard  or  known  in  general  society,  now-a-days, 
of  Spain  or  the  Spaniards,  so  few  names  now  rise 
to  the  surface  so  as  to  be  saved  from  the  waters  of 
oblivion ;  and  even  these  few  are  rarely  known  to  any 
but  the  small  party  constituting  the  creme  de  la 
creme  of  different  nations;  that  on  hearing  mentioned in  presentation  to  me,  those  of  Villa  Hermosa, 
Pinalves,  Fernandina,  Velasquez,  Alva,  Alvarez,  Ximenes,  &c.,  I  was  for  a  short  time  almost  bewildered, 
wondering  whether  I  had  gone  back  to  school  days 
and  was  brushing  up  my  history,  or  whether  I  had 
fallen  into  a  reverie  over  the  chronicles  of  the  Cid  or 
Don  Quixote.  It  was  all  real,  however,  and  a  most 
agreeable  and  sociable  party;  but  so  I  find  all 
General  Canedo's  are.  His  receptions  are  on  the  plan 
of  most  royal  levees  and  similar  ceremonies;  yet, 
strange  to  say,  here  in  Cuba  the  regal  or  vice-regal 
audiences  are  far  less  serious  affairs  than  a  private 
"  morning  call."  With  the  captain-general,  when  you 
have  properly  gone  through  the  ceremony  of  making 
your  reverence  to  the  representative  of  Queen  Isabel, 
you  may  do  whatever  you  please,  walk  about,  change 
your  place,  in  short,  amuse  yourself  as  fancy  leads  you. 
But  with  the  Cuban  nobility  and  gentlefolks  it  is 
quite  another  affair.  I  remember  receiving  a  very 
strong  impression  on  this  subject  from  one  of  the 
first  visits  I  paid  in  Havana,  namely,  to  the  Count  and 
Countess  O'Reilly,  to  whom  Isturiz  had  "addressed 
me."  I  was  shown  into  a  large  barren-looking  room 
(but  from  the  windows  of  which  there  was  a  most 
heavenly  view),  the  only  furniture  which  was  visible 
—  and  that  most  alarmingly  so  —  being  a  dozen 
rocking  chairs  ranged  in  two  rows  opposite  each 
other.  La  Senora  Condesa  received  me,  seated  in 
one  of  these  machines,  and  placed  me  next  her.  By 
and  by,  in  walked  some  junior  members  (males)  of 
the  family;  they  planted  themselves  just  opposite,  and 
we  all  began  to  talk;  but  it  was  in  vain  to  try 
and  turn  the  conversation  to  some  less  engrossing 
subject  than  how  or  where  we  had  all  spent  our 
morning.  I  think  I  must  have  got  what  the  French 
call  an  attaque  de  nerfs.  At  last  I  remarked  on  the 
beauty  of  the  view,  the  flowers,  everything  I  could 
see ;  and  of  course  hoped  a  walk  on  the  terrace  would 
be  proposed.  But  nothing  of  the  sort ;  each  male 
who  came  in  seating  himself  on  one  side  and  each 
female  on  the  other,  till  we  must  all  have  looked 
like  a  pack  of  ghosts,  bowing  to  each  other. 
To  be  sure,  it  was  consolatory  to  be  told  everything 
they  possessed  was  mine,  and  entirely  at  my  disposition ;  yet  I  would  willingly  have  sacrificed  all  these 
possessions  "  en  Espagne  "  for  the  present  power  of 
pushing  away  my  rocking  chair  and  going  wherever 
the  spirit  impelled  me.  Having  now  been  here  some 
time,  and  having  had  opportunities  afforded  me  of 
gaining  a  thorough  insight  into  the  way  things  are 
socially  conducted,  I  understand  tolerably  well  the 
principles  on  which  visiting  is  carried  on.  A  call  is 
a  state  ceremony,  and  if  you  are  the  bearer  of  a  letter 
of  introduction,  the  greater  form  and  etiquette  with 
which  you  are  received,  the  greater  is  the  honour  they 
intend  thereby  to  show  you,  and  greater  the  compliment to  the  friend  who  introduces  you.  Of  course  this 
applies  to  the  Havanese  or  Spanish  only ;  other  people 
act  according  to  the  custom  of-  their  own  country, 
whatever  that  may  be.  The  excessive  formality, 
however,  of  which  I  have  been  telling  is  only  applicable 
to  the  first  visit  or  morning  call,  as  after  that  you  are 
generally  invited  to  the  evening  receptions  or  tertullias  given  by  most  of  the  Havanese  families  on  stated 
evenings.  Here  you  amuse  yourself  well  enough,  and' 
above  all,  as  you  please.  You  may  dance,  or  play 
on  the  piano,  or  play  at  cards,  or  at  petits-jeux.  At 
each  or  all  of  these  you  will  find  companions ;  or,  if 
you  are  in  a  savage  mood,  you  may  swing  in  a  rocking 
chair,  no  very  uncommon  occupation  either,  and  a  very 
decided  improvement  on  trying  to  keep  oneself  still 
on  the  edge  of  one,  as  befell  me,  as  I  have  narrated, 
on  my  first  state  visit  to  Countess  O'Eeilly.  To-night 
I  was  presented  to  one  of  the  great  dignitaries  of  the 
church,  namely,  the  Archbishop  of  Santiago  de  Cuba, 
who  bears  the  rather  singular  name  (at  least  to  my 
ears),  "  Claret  y  Clara."  When  I  was  a  child  I  used 
to  be  called,  by  way  of  a  diminutive  or  pet  name, 
"  Clara  Claretti,"  so  I  was  not  a  little  amused  at 
finding  the  Eeverendissimo  Padre  "  answer  to "  my 
name  reversed,  that  is,  "  Claret  y  Clara ! "  The 
minister  of  police  was  another  of  the  guests  who  attracted my  attention  and  wonder,  the  latter  from  his 
being  one  of  the  most  innocent  and  simple-looking 
individuals  I  ever  remember  seeing.  Nor  did  his 
manners  or  conversation  belie  the  expression  of  his 
face.  He  seemed  good  nature  and  benevolence  personified. Of  course,  all  this  may  be  assumed ;  if  so,  he 
is  a  consummate  actor.  But  I  can  scarcely  think  it ; 
and  if  he  really  is  as  kind-hearted  as  he  looks,  I  should 
not  exactly  think  him  qualified  for  the  trying  post 
of  Minister  of  Police  in  a  place  where,  owing  to  the 
secret  machinations  and  insidious  agents  of  the  United 
States,  always  at  work  to  sow  the  seeds  of  revolt,  or 
blow  the  faintest  spark  of  discontent  into  a  blaze,  it 
would  seem  imperatively  necessary  that  one  on 
whom  so  much  may  depend  vitally  affecting  the 
island  and  the  honour  of  the  Spanish  crown,  should 
be  no  mere  carpet  knight,  but  one  possessed  of  "  the 
mind  to  will,  the  hand  to  execute."  While  on  this 
subject,  i.e.  the  constant  plots  and  attempts  at  annexation carried  on  so  unblushingly,  though  happily 
hitherto  ineffectually,  by  the  American  filibusters,  I 
will  endeavour  to  give  you  a  slight  sketch  of  the 
principal  incidents  connected  with  the  memorable 
Lopez  expedition. 