WHATEVER  difference  of  opinion  may  exist  regarding 
the  political  expediency  of  annexation,  or  whatever 
may  be  argued  on  the  one  side  or  the  other  of  the 
advantages  to  be  gained  by  America,  or  even,  as  advanced by  some  casuists,  ultimately  to  Spain,  there 
can  be  but  one  view  entertained  by  any  right  thinking or  even  commonly  honest  persons  with  respect  to 
the  course  adopted  by  the  States  in  this  unhappy  affair. It  must  redound  to  the  eternal  disgrace  of 
the  Americans,  of  those  at  least  who  were  the  movers 
or  promoters  of  the  scheme,  that  they  inveigled 
into  their  toils,  and  chose  for  their  tools — in  this 
atrocious  outrage  on  a  friendly  nation  —  not  grown 
men  who  knew  what  they  risked,  knew  what  they  did, 
and,  whether  for  good  or  for  ill,  were  prepared  to 
abide  the  issue ;  not  these,  but  young,  ardent,  enthusiastic boys.  In  some  instances,  mere  lads  of  fifteen 
and  sixteen  were  enticed  and  snared  away  from  their 
homes  to  join  in  this  nefarious  enterprise.  And  under 
whose  command  were  these  misguided  victims  placed? 
Under  a  hero,  a  man  of  honour,  a  man  of  even  ordinary good  faith  or  honesty  of  purpose  ?     No :    but 
under  the  orders  of  a  traitor,  a    renegade  soldier, 
false  to  his  colours  and  his  country,  a  broken  and  disgraced castaway  from  the  Spanish  army — General 
Narciso  Lopez !     To  trace  the  causes  which  influenced, 
and  which  afterwards  perhaps  mainly  contributed  to 
the   maturing  these   schemes,  and   their   disastrous 
results,  it  will  be  necessary  to  go  back  to  the  commencement of  the  year  1848.     The  French  Revolution,    which   had   hurled   Louis   Philippe   from   his 
throne,  had  not  only  convulsed  the  whole  of  Europe, 
but  had  greatly  added  to  and  lent  impetus  to  revolu- 
tionary and   democratic  principles  in  both  the  Old 
world   and  the  New.      To  the  demagogues  of  the 
United  States,  especially,  no  period  could  have  been 
more  propitious :  their  recent  annexation  of  Texas  had 
disclosed  to  them  the  sweets  of  stolen  goods  —  a  species 
of  pleasure  peculiarly  grateful  to  the  American  sense. 
Added  to  this,  some  cheap  and  easy  victories  which 
had  crowned  their  arms  in  the  Mexican  Eepublic 
rendered   their    acquisition    of    Cuba   an    "  eternal 
necessity  "  (as  a  Yankee  once  told  me  in  talking 
over  the  subject).     They  took  their  measures  accordingly.    To  set  the  press  to  work  to  write  inflammatory articles   in  all   directions,  was   of  course  easy 
enough ;    but  besides  this,  they  hired  a  number  of 
other  agents,  for  the  most  part  men  of  the  worst
character,  to  visit  the  island  in  the  guise  of  inoffensive strangers,  but  who  were  to  take  every  opportunity of  fomenting  any  discontent  which  might 
arise  from  natural  causes ;  to  sound  the  opinions,  and 
discover  the  weak  points  of  all  on  whom  they  might 
find  the  arts  of  seduction  would  tell :  in  short,  to 
arouse  the  passion  of  resentment  and  kindle  rebellion 
against  their  masters  in  all  who  were  misguided 
enough  to  listen  to  them.  One  of  the  first,  and 
certainly  the  most  important  of  the  proselytes  they 
gained,  was  the  famous  Lopez.  This  man  was  a 
native  of  Venezuela,  but  had  served  from  his  youth 
in  the  Spanish  army.  Even  after  the  declaration  of 
independence  by  that  state,  he  adhered  to  his  former 
allegiance,  and  by  his  own  request  became  a  naturalised subject  of  the  Spanish  government,  and  maintained his  rank  as  an  officer  in  the  army.  He 
was,  however,  a  few  years  previously  (in  1841) 
General  Commandant  of  the  Centre  of  the  Island 
and  Governor  of  Trinidad.  In  course  of  time  this 
was  relinquished,  on  his  being  appointed  President 
"  de  la  comision  militar"  of  the  whole  island, 
and  this  post  he  actually  held  in  1848,  being 
quartered  in  Cienfuegos  at  the  southern  -part  of  the 
country.  Here  took  place  the  beginning  of  the  end 
a  few  years  later.  Profiting  by  his  high  position, 
and  the  consequent  knowledge  he  possessed  of  the 
strength  as  of  the  weakness  of  the  government,  as
well  as  the  prestige  of  his  own  popularity,  which 
was  considerable,  he  commenced  the  formation  of 
a  plan,  which,  by  the  gradual  and  insidious  corruption 
of  the  soldiery  under  him,  and  the  judicious  expenditure of  American  dollars  in  bribes  and  other  modes, 
was  ultimately  to  lead  to  the  betrayal  of  his  trust 
and  the  delivery  of  the  island  to  the  United  States. 
But  the  old  saying,  "  Treason  never  prospers,"  proved 
itself  true  in  this  instance,  as  in  many  others.  Information was  conveyed  by  some  unknown  hand  to 
the  then  Governor  of  Trinidad  of  the  conspiracy  and 
its  chief  promoter,  and  measures  were  promptly 
taken  for  the  arrest  of  Lopez  in  the  first  instance. 
He  too,  however,  received  timely  warning  and  succeeded in  escaping  to  the  States.  A  military  commission was  held  immediately,  at  which  all  circumstances connected  with  the  plot  were  discovered. 
It  had  not  then  spread  very  far,  nor  were  the  arrangements sufficiently  matured  to  cause  for  the  time 
being  many  fears  for  the  future.  Lopez  was  tried 
by  court  martial,  broken  and  disgraced  from  the 
army,  and  condemned  to  death  as  guilty  of  high 
treason  and  rebellion.  Thus  matters  stood  (with 
the  further  discovery  and  discomfiture  of  another 
though  less  important  combination  in  the  following 
November)  at  the  close  of  1848.  The  ensuing  year, 
1849,  passed  in  comparative  tranquillity,  disturbed 
only  at  one  period  by  the  news  of  a  society  being 
organised  in  Rhode  Island  for  the  old  story.  This, 
however,  was  publicly  discouraged  by  the  President 
of  the  United  States  (General  Taylor),  its  dispersion 
ordered  —  a  further  enactment  that  it  should  be  declared "piracy,"  with  all  the  attendant  pains  and  penalties, in  whomsoever  should  make  any  fresh  attempts 
on  Cuba.  This  slight  interlude  of  peace  was  soon 
to  be  troubled:  1850,  which  had  dawned  auspiciously, 
was  speedily  to  be  shadowed  by  the  dark  cloud  of 
war  and  tumult,  and,  worse  still,  of  pestilence ;  and 
even  this  last  scourge  the  unfortunate  Cubans  owed, 
under  Heaven's  permission,  to  the  Americans.  During 
the  two  preceding  years  the  southern  portion  of 
the  North  American  continent  had  terribly  suffered 
from  the  ravages  of  cholera ;  yet,  thanks  to  the 
general  precautions  taken  all  over  the  island,  Cuba 
had  so  far  escaped  contagion.  Towards  the  close  of 
the  month  of  March  a  few  isolated  cases  only  pre- 
sented themselves  in  the  military  hospital  of  Havana, 
but  in  the  course  of  a  few  short  weeks  the  epidemic 
rapidly  increased,  and  by  the  middle  of  May  the 
mortality  had  attained  an  average  of  125  to  150 
a  day  in  Havana  alone.  It  was  in  this  deplorable 
state  of  affairs,  and  when  the  attention  and  energies 
of  all  were  directed  to  alleviating  the  sufferings  of 
the  sick,  and  warding  off  as  far  as  might  be  the 
approaches  of  disease  from  the  comparatively  small 
number  of  places  that  were  as  yet  unscathed,  that 
the  first  serious  invasion,  under  the  auspices  of 
Lopez,  was  accomplished.  On  the  19th  of  May 
he  surprised  the  town  of  Cardenas  just  before  day- 
break, and  effected  a  landing,  together  with  five  hundred companions.  It  seems  very  extraordinary 
that  Cardenas,  though  a  seaport,  and  possessing  a 
population  of  3500  souls,  should  have  been  indebted to  a  guard  of  seventeen  men  only  for 
the  first  desperate  resistance  the  invaders  encountered. They  fought  gallantly,  however,  though 
against  impossible  odds  ;  they  intrenched  themselves 
in  four  houses,  and  only  after  eleven  of  their  little 
band  being  killed  or  wounded,  and  the  houses  they 
had  barricaded  set  fire  to,  they  succumbed.  But 
they  had  already  succeeded  in  gaining  the  inestimable benefit  of  time.  The  obstinate  defence 
they  had  made  had  lasted  several  hours,  and  had 
enabled  a  few  sturdy  townspeople,  who  had  not  lost 
their  wits  with  alarm,  to  summon  assistance  from  the 
neighbourhood.  The  great  majority  of  the  inhabitants, I  am  told,  however,  were  so  horror-struck, 
partly  with  fear,  and  partly  with  surprise,  at  their 
morning  slumbers  being  thus  so  rudely  broken,  that 
they  became  as  if  paralysed,  and  either  barred  themselves up  in  their  own  houses,  leaving  the  public 
buildings  to  the  mercy  of  the  depredators,  or  else,  as 
occurred  in  many  instances,  fled  precipitately  into 
the  country,  leaving  all  their  property  to  its  fate. 
Succour  was  now  at  hand :  towards  the  close  of  the 
day  some  strong  reinforcements  of  regular  troops 
from  Matanzas  and  elsewhere  poured  into  the 
beleaguered  town.  These  were  also  aided  further  by  a 
small  band  of  the  neighbouring  peasantry,  who 
armed  and  placed  themselves  under  the  command  of 
the  regular  officers.  A  hand  to  hand  fight  now  took 
place,  which  resulted  in  the  total  rout  of  the  enemy, 
who  were  driven  back  in  confusion  to  their  boats, 
and  under  cover  of  the  night  made  good  their  escape, 
together,  unfortunately,  with  the  traitor  Lopez.  The 
next  morning  the  extent  of  injury  incurred  by  the 
town  was  verified,  of  which  it  may  truly  be  said,  it  is 
well  it  was  no  worse.  The  churches,  rich  houses 
and  public  buildings,  generally,  were  despoiled  of 
whatever  ornaments,  or  objects  of  value  they  contained. Moreover  Lopez,  "  qui  s'y  connaissait," 
contrived  to  "  abstract "  a  considerable  quantity  of 
money  from  the  custom  house  and  the  Fondo  de  las 
obras  Publicas  (an  establishment  answering  to.  the 
French  Hotels  de  Villes),  both  of  which  edifices  he 
completely  ransacked.  The  news  of  the  attack,  and 
its  signal  defeat,  was  now  quickly  conveyed  to 
Havana.  The  people  concerned  seemed  to  have  been 
too  busy  to  think  of  taking  or  sending  any  information at  the  time ;  at  least,  it  was  certainly  not  known 
in  Havana  till  the  next  day,  and  then  singularly 
enough,  almost  simultaneously  with  the  Cardenas 
history,  there  entered  the  harbour  a  Spanish  war- 
steamer,  called  the  Pizarro,  commanded  by  a 
Captain  Armero,  bringing  with  him  between  fifty 
and  sixty  prisoners  he  had  fished  up  in  Yucatan. 
They  gave  this  account  of  themselves :  that  they  had 
started  with  Lopez,  intending  to  join  in  the  attack 
on  Cardenas,  but  had  repented  en  route,  and  consequently had  been  set  on  shore  in  Yucatan  and  left 
to  their  fate.  Sad  and  melancholy  as  was  the 
general  aspect  of  Havana  at  this  time  of  disease  and 
trouble,  the  intelligence  of  this  double  event,  caused 
an  universal  and  spontaneous  demonstration  of 
enthusiasm  and  goodwill  to  the  government.  The 
prisoners  brought  in  the  Pizarro  were  mostly 
liberated,  with  the  exception  of  three  or  four,  but 
who  afterwards  received  a  free  pardon  from  the 
Queen.  On  the  old  principle  of  shutting  the  stable- 
door  when  the  steed  was  stolen  (which  proverb  by 
the  bye  is  of  Spanish  origin)  measures  were  now 
taken  throughout  the  island  for  an  organised  system 
of  defence.  No  great  difficulty  certainly  presented 
itself.  In  an  incredibly  short  time,  upwards  of 
13,000  men  enrolled  themselves  in  the  volunteer 
service  of  the  Government;  3000  muskets  were 
distributed  by  the  Captain- General  in  Havana,  and 
the  remaining  10,000  volunteers  were  formed  into 
four  battalions  which  were  variously  distributed 
about  the  country.  The  style  and  title  of  "  Nobles
Vecinos " were  given  them.  There  were  hopes 
now  entertained  that,  tired  and  discouraged  by  the 
successive  failures  which  had  been  their  lot,  the 
filibusters  would  at  last  give  way,  and  Cuba  be  left 
in  peace.  To  a  certain  extent  these  hopes  were 
fulfilled ;  a  little  breathing  time  at  least  was  enjoyed. 
In  the  meanwhile  the  governor  of  the  island  was 
relieved  from  the  post  he  had  filled  during  this 
troubled  period.  He  was  succeeded  by  Greneral 
Concha,  one  of 'the  most  popular  captains-general, 
from  all  accounts,  that  have  ever  wielded  the  vice- 
regal sceptre  here.  For  his  administration  was 
reserved  the  honour  of  defeating  the  last  and  most 
important  attack  yet  made  by  the  Annexation  party, 
of  crushing  for  ever  the  career  of  Lopez  and  the  few 
Spanish  adherents  he  had  gained,  and  this,  notwithstanding the  success  which,  for  the  first  three  days, 
attended  them;  and  finally  of  reading  a  lesson  to  the 
Americans,  which  it  is  to  be  hoped  will  not  be  lost 
upon  them,  teaching  them  how,  by  their  unconquerable love  of  wrong  and  robbery,  they  have  not  only 
delivered  over  to  famine,  disease,  imprisonment,  and 
death, — inglorious  and  shameful  death,  —  the  numbers of  brave  and  thoughtless  boys,  the  account  of 
whose  sufferings  forms  one  of  the  most  painful  episodes 
in  this  sad  history ;  but  they  have  lowered  themselves 
in  the  estimation  of  mankind,  disgraced  the  stars  and 
stripes  in  the  eyes  of  surrounding  nations.  Yes, 
(e  repudiate "  as  they  may,  they  have  connived  at 
and  allowed  that  flag  to  afford  protection  to  as 
desperate  a  gang  of  pirates  and  banditti  as  ever 
crossed  a  sea  or  devastated  a  land.  I  am,  however, 
rather  forestalling  events,  and  must  now  endeavour 
to  relate,  in  their  proper  order,  the  various  incidents 
as  they  occurred,  from  the  first  alarm  being  sounded 
in  the  summer  of  the  year  1851. 