August  4th.  —  We  have  now  been  waiting  here 
twelve  days  for  the  Isabel  Segunda  steamer.  She 
arrived  at  length,  and  we  came  on  board  last  night  to 
sleep,  as  daybreak  was  the  time  fixed  for  sailing  this 
morning.  We  have  a  wonderful  collection  of  people, 
some  of  them  not  of  the  choicest  description,  and  who 
look  very  much  out  of  place  in  the  beautiful  crimson 
and  gold-decorated  saloon,  from  a  corner  of  which  I 
am  writing  to  you.  The  heat  is  something  indescribable, notwithstanding  the  sea-breeze ;  and,  as  you  may 
imagine,  there  being  a  bright  moonlight,  we  were  glad 
to  remain  on  deck  the  greater  part  of  the  night,  instead of  going  to  the  hot,  close,  little  cabin  assigned 
to  us  for  sleeping  quarters. 

Friday,  5th. — We  touched  this  morning  at  a  place 
called  Key  West,  for  the  purpose  of  taking  on  board 
a  lot  of  turtles.  Poor  things  !  it  is  melancholy  to  see 
them  flapping  and  floundering  about  the  deck,  awaiting their  fate  and  their  turn  to  be  converted  into 
soup  !  Two  of  our  Cuban  friends,  who  are  proceeding 
to  New  York  direct  in  the  Isabel,  wish  to  persuade 
us  to  do  likewise ;  but  this  stifling  heat  is  unbearable ; 
so  we  shall  adhere  to  our  original  plan  of  travelling 
there  by  land  from  Charleston,  of  which  place  we 
are  just  now  in  sight,  so  I  must  go  on  deck  to  take 
my  first  look  at  the  continent  of  America. 
The  entrance  to  the  harbour  is  remarkably  wide, 
about  two  miles  across.  It  is  formed  by  the  junction 
of  two  rivers,  the  Ashley  and  the  Cooper,  the  former 
of  which  is  considerably  upwards  of  6000  feet  in 
width,  and  the  latter  4000  feet.  The  approach  and 
the  crossing  of  the  bar  are  difficult,  and  in  stormy 
weather  must  be  dangerous  enough  ;  shoals  and 
quicksands  abound.  To-day,  though  perfectly  calm 
and  fine,  our  boat  pitched,  and  rolled,  and  whirled 
about  in  the  most  distracted  manner  before  succeeding in  making  good  her  entrance  into  the  port. 
Charleston  is  at  present  in  a  very  flourishing  condition, being  the  richest  as  well  as  the  most  populous 
town,  or  rather  city,  I  believe  it  is  more  correctly 
termed,  of  South  Carolina.  Cotton,  rice,  and  tobacco 
are  the  principal  products  of  the  state ;  but  of  these 
the  two  first  form  much  the  larger  portion  of  the 
trade  carried  on.  After  taking  some  dinner  at  the 
hotel,  we  procured  a  vehicle  (I  have  yet  to  learn 
what  they  are  termed  here,  —  whether  cabs,  flies, 
coaches,  or  carriages,  but  they  are  not  volantes 
at  all  events),  in  which  we  proceeded  to  find  out 
what  we  could  of  the  celebrities  of  the  place.  The 
streets  are  wide,  clean,  and  airy;  the  houses  not 
altogether  ugly,  in  spite  of  their  being  made  of 
red  brick.  Some  handsome  public  buildings,  including the  Exchange,  City  Hall,  and  Citadel,  but 
we  were  most  pleased  with  the  public  promenade, 
which  extends  for  a  considerable  distance  by  the 
water  side,  and  is  thickly  planted  with  trees.  From 
this  spot  a  very  fine  view  is  obtained  of  the  harbour 
and  forts,  and  the  ocean  beyond.  Charleston  seems 
most  unusually  protected  by  strong  places.  If  I 
remember  rightly,  we  counted  four  forts  independently of  the  citadel.  Of  these  the  most  famous 
and  interesting,  to  us  at  least,  is  Fort  Moultrie  on 
Sullivan's  Island,  very  near  to  the  harbour,  where 
the  English  under  Sir  Peter  Parker  were  repulsed 
in  the  War  of  Independence  in  1776.  As  you  may 
suppose,  we  being  Englishwomen,  were  very  especially informed  of  our  national  defeat.  Having 
enjoyed  our  drive  very  much,  we  finished  off  with 
going  to  witness  the  departure  of  the  Isabel  with  our 

two  friends  the  D 's  on  board,  continuing  their 

route  to  New  York.  And  now,  for  the  first  time 
since  parting  from  you  at  Southampton,  we  are 
alone,  that  is  to  say,  we  shall  set  out  on  our  travels 
to-morrow  unaccompanied  by  any  one  we  know  or 
have  ever  seen  before.  I  must  make  this  letter 
shorter  than  usual,  being  a  good  deal  tired  by  the 
heat  and  crowd  on  our  voyage  from  Havana,  and 
our  departure  to-morrow  being  very  matinal.  Moreover, the  first  portion  of  our  journey  is  to  be  again 
aquatic,  in  accordance  with  the  suggestion  and  advice 
of  the  people  here,  and  we  take  the  steamer  to  a 
place  called  Wilmington. — Yours  ever, 

C. 