ON  the  llth  of  August  of  that  year,  Lopez  disembarked at  a  place  called  El  Morrillo  near  Bahia 
Honda,  a  short  distance  to  the  west  of  Havana.  His 
force  amounted  on  this  occasion  to  about  450,  but 
nearly  half  of  these  consisted  of  the  youthful  victims 
I  have  before  alluded  to.  He  directed  his  steps  in 
the  first  instance,  with  about  300  of  his  followers,  to 
the  little  village  of  Las  Pozas ;  the  remaining  portion of  them  being  left  in  charge  of  the  baggage  and 
provisions,  with  orders  to  join  themselves  to  the 
main  body  at  the  earliest  opportunity  consistent  with 
safety.  Meanwhile,  unlike  the  former  occasion,  the 
news  had  spread  like  wildfire,  and  in  as  short  a  space 
of  time  as  circumstances  would  allow,  seven  companies 
of  infantry  under  the  command  of  General  Ena  embarked from  Havana  and  reached  the  scene  of  action, 
or  I  should  rather  say  approached  it,  as  for  a  short 
period  they  halted  at  Morrillo  to  reconnoitre  the  state 
of  affairs.  In  talking  over  these  things  now,  quietly 
and  at  a  distance,  I  am  told,  by  those  who  are  considered competent  to  pronounce  a  judgment,  that 
General  Ena  made  a  great  mistake  in  not  taking 
more  time ;  that,  seeing  how  things  were,  and  that 
Lopez  had  been  enabled  during  the  long  day  of  the 
12th  of  August  to  most  importantly  improve  and 
strengthen  his  position,  having  managed  by  means  of 
trenches,  mounds,  parapets,  &c.  to  establish  a  sort  of 
fortification ;  Ena  should  have  sent  for  more  help, 
and  also  some  guns  from  Havana,  instead  of  risking 
an  attack  under  these  disadvantageous  circumstances. 
Unfortunately,  he  seems,  however,  to  have  been  a  man 
of  more  daring  and  courage  than  reflection  ;  and  accordingly, without  waiting  for  what  prudence  might 
have  counselled,  he  ordered  an  impetuous  assault  in 
the  evening.  To  add  to  the  unfavourable  chances,  his 
men  were  already  tired,  hungry,  exhausted ;  they  had 
had  neither  rest,  food,  nor  drink  since  their  disembarkation and  had  waited  under  arms  during  the 
whole  night  of  the  12th.  Early  on  the  morning  then 
of  the  13th  (having  marched  from  Morrillo)  was  the 
word  of  command  given,  and  without  one  single 
piece  of  artillery  with  which  to  return  the  enemy's 
fire  (who  had  well  provided  themselves  with  field 
pieces),  and  faint  in  body  though  not  in  spirit,  they 
made  a  .gallant,  but,  as  may.  be  supposed,  fruitless 
effort.  The  village  of  Las  Pozas  being  built  something in  the  form  of  a  two-pronged  fork,  the  besiegers  had  to  divide  themselves  into  two  separate 
parties,  and  as  these  were  composed  of  only  two 
companies  each  (the  remaining  three  being  left  as  a 
corps  de  reserve  at  Morrillo),  little  damage  was  done 
to  the  besieged.  After  some  desperate  fighting,  Ena 
and  his  band  were  forced  to  retire  ;  their  retreat  was 
however  most  admirably  managed,  and,  as  it  happened, was  the  means,  thanks  to  the  perfect  discipline and  order  maintained,  of  half  retrieving  the 
fortune  of  the  day.  Lopez  trusting  to  the  prestige 
of  this,  his  first  and  most  unlooked-for  success, 
ordered  a  sortie,  and  an  attack  to  be  made  in  the 
rear  of  the  retreating  Spaniards.  This  was  a  bad 
enough  move ;  the  Royal  troops,  having  retreated 
in  unbroken  order,  now  faced  about ;  a  furious  hand- 
to-hand  fight  ensued,  which  ended  in  upwards  of  a 
hundred  of  the  enemy  being  left  dead  or  wounded  on 
the  field.  While  these  events  were  taking  place  at 
Las  Pozas,  the  remaining  three  companies  of  the 
Spanish  soldiery,  under  the  command  of  Colonel 
Villaoz,  who  had  remained  in  reserve  at  Morrillo,  had 
fallen  upon  the  commissariat  and  baggage  parties  of 
the  filibusters,  and  obtained  a  signal  success.  These 
last  consisted  of  nearly  180  men  and  boys.  They 
were  totally  defeated  and  put  to  the  rout :  more  than 
half  were  killed  and  wounded  on  the  spot;  about 
forty  succeeded  in  reaching  the  sea  and  embarking 
in  boats,  by  which  means  ten  or  twelve  perhaps  accomplished  a  safe  passage  to  the  United  States ;  the 
remainder  were  caught,  made  prisoners,  tried  by 
court  martial  and  shot,  poor  wretches,  with  very 
little  ceremony  at  Havana  within  a  few  days  of  their 
flight.  Their  fate,  miserable  as  it  was,  however, 
must  be  considered  more  fortunate  than  much  that 
was  in  store  for  some  other  of  their  fellow-conspirators in  this  eventful  and  ill-starred  expedition.  By 
his  imprudent  sortie  from  Las  Pozas,  and  the  severe 
check  he  there  encountered,  Lopez  had,  though  late, 
taken  warning ;  and,  profiting  by  his  past  experience, 
he  now  decided  on  a  sort  of  guerilla  mode  of  warfare, 
by  which  he  hoped  to  hold  on  until  he  had  regathered  and  to  some  extent  reorganised  his  scattered 
force.  With  this  intention  he  evacuated  Pozas  the 
same  day,  and  its  terrified  inhabitants  might  have 
returned  to  their  homes  ;  but  they  had  already  wandered away  far  and  wide,  thinking,  very  reasonably, 
that  the  marauders  were  unlikely  to  have  left  anything but  desolation  behind  them  Lopez  now  retired to  the  hills  and  fastnesses  abounding  in  the 
Cordillera  or  mountain  chain  of  the  Vuelta  Abajo. 
Here  the  natural  difficulties  in  the  way  of  attack, 
facilities  for  defence, — the  character  of  the  country 
rendering  it  inaccessible  to  cavalry,  while  immense 
rocks  seeming  as  if  they  had  suddenly  sprung  from 
the  ground  on  purpose  to  afford  safe  ambuscade  to 
brigands  of  everv  description, —  might  have  well 
enabled  a  guerilla  leader,  who  possessed  the  sympathies and  goodwill,  or  even  who  had  not  incurred 
the  opposition,  of  the  dwellers  on  the  soil,  to  maintain 
himself  against  all  aggression  for  months  or  even 
years.  But  this  was  not  the  good  fortune  of 
Lopez.  He  had,  on  the  contrary,  provoked  the 
hostility  and  let  loose  the  indignation  of  all  classes 
against  him.  The  homes  he  had  burnt  and  destroyed, the  lands  he  had  ravaged  and  laid  waste, 
the  blood  he  had  shed  or  caused  to  be  shed  of  the 
unoffending  and  helpless  peasantry  on  whom  he  had 
descended  like  a  thunder-bolt,  the  havock  and  ruin 
which  everywhere  marked  the  traces  of  his  path',  had 
armed  every  man's  hand  against  him :  there  were  none 
to  help,  there  were  all  to  oppose.  Whatever  he  succeeded in  obtaining,  whether  food  or  aught  else,  was 
by  violence  or  theft.  Nothing  was  given,  nothing 
sold  to  him.  War  to  the  knife  was  the  general  and 
universal  sentiment  aroused  in  the  hearts  of  all,  and 
so  the  catastrophe  was  gradually  approaching.  Long, 
long  after  these  events  had  passed  and  gone,  things 
began  to  ooze  out  little  by  little,  which  showed  how 
miserably  the  majority  of  these  unlucky  Americans 
must  have  been  deceived,  deliberately  and  systematically misled  from  the  very  beginning  of  the  enterprise. 
They  were  positively  assured,  and  were  shown  letters 
purporting  to  come  from  the  heads  of  the  principal 
families  in  Cuba,  as  well  as  from  officers  high  in  the 
army,  that  the  whole  island  was  prepared  to  rise  to  a 
man  to  shake  off  the  Spanish  dominion;  that  parties 
were  organised,  plans  of  action  laid,  a  period  of  simultaneous action  prepared  and  made  ready,  for  which 
the  signal  was  to  be  the-  landing  of  Lopez  and  his 
band :  in  short,  that  from  every  fort  and  tower  the 
flag  of  Castile  and  Leon  was  to  be  struck,  and  the 
triumphant  "Stripes  and  Stars"  unfurled  in  its  place! 
How  such  absurd  trash  should  have  been  believed  for 
one  moment,  and  much  more  acted  upon,  by  even  the 
youngest  and  most  credulous  of  their  number,  has 
never  been  made  very  clear  ;  but  of  the  misrepresentation by  which  they  were  deluded,  there  is  no  doubt. 
To  return  to  my  narrative  :  the  position  of  the  enemy 
being  known,  and,  thanks  to  the  unwavering  fidelity 
and  loyalty  of  the  country  people,  General  En  a  and 
his  officers  being  made  acquainted  with  every  movement attempted  or  carried  into  effect  by  the  invaders, 
some  fresh  detachments  of  troops  having  been  now 
supplied,  the  General  proceeded  to  form  a  cordon 
round  that  part  of  the  Cordillera  which  sheltered  the 
insurgents,  so  as  to  effectually  close  up  all  avenues  of 
retreat,  and,  to  a  great  degree,  any  possibility  of  changing their  quarters.  The  consequence  of  this  line  of 
action  became  soon  apparent.  Want  of  provisions 
soon  forced  Lopez  to  send  a  foraging  party  from 
their  lurking-place  to  seek  food,  or,  indeed  I  should 
more  correctly  say,  his  whole  body  sallied  forth  for 
this  object.  They  had  advanced  as  far  as  a  Cafetal 
or  Coffee  Plantation,  called  "  El  Cafetal  de  Frias," 
where  they  were  attacked  by  the  Eoyalist  regiments, 
commanded  by  Greneral  Ena  in  person.  What  the 
ultimate  result  of  this  engagement  might  have  been 
under  other  circumstances  it  is  impossible  to  say,  but 
the  conflict  had  scarcely  begun,  indeed,  the  general 
firing  had  not  commenced,  when  the  ill-fated  Ena, 
who  had  ridden  to  the  front  in  order  to  give  some 
directions  about  the  maneuvering  of  his  men,  received 
a  ball  in  his  chest,  and  immediately  dropped  from  his 
horse.  He  was  instantaneously  carried  to  the  rear,  and 
some  faint  hopes  were  entertained  that  the  wound  might 
not  prove  mortal ;  but  all  in  vain,  and  he  breathed 
his  last  on  the  field  where  he  lay.  This  unlooked-for 
disaster  spread  such  consternation  among  the  Spanish 
troops,  that,  had  the  rebels  taken  the  advantage  they 
might  have  done  at  the  sudden  shock,  almost  amounting to  a  panic,  which  seized  their  opponents,  they 
might,  at  least  in  the  first  hours  of  confusion,  have  
gained  some  immediate  if  not  permanent  success.  It  is 
doubtful,  however,  whether  they  knew  what  had  really 
occurred,  until  some  time  after ;  but  it  is  certain  that, 
instead  of  advancing  or  even  holding  the  ground  they 
possessed,  they  made  a  precipitate  and  somewhat 
disorderly  retreat,  but  were  unpursued ;  so  that  this 
eventful  day  of  the  seventeenth  of  August,  which  at 
its  commencement  was  supposed  to  herald  something 
decisive  on  one  side  or  the  other,  left  matters  on  the 
contrary  much  as  they  were,  the  loss  of  the  unfortunate General  Ena  only  excepted.  The  intelligence 
of  his  death  caused  universal  regret  in  Havana,  where 
he  was  respected  in  his  public  and  loved  in  his 
private  character.  The  highest  honours  were  paid  to 
his  remains  on  their  reaching  Havana,  whence  they 
were  conveyed  on  board  ship,  and  carried  to  his 
native  land  for  interment.  Yet  a  few  more  days,  and 
the  last  hopes  of  the  invaders  were  destroyed,  and 
the  star  of  Lopez  set  for  ever.  The  second  in 
command  after  General  Ena,  Colonel  Elizalde,  came 
up  with  them  at  a  place  called  Candillaria,  and  a 
sharp  engagement  took  place,  when  they  were  totally 
routed.  There  now  remained  but  a  hundred  followers of  Lopez  out  of  the  number  he  had  brought 
into  this  disastrous  undertaking,  and  these  few  were 
in  their  turn  encountered  on  the  24th,  dispersed  and 
scattered  far  and  wide.  And  now  began,  for  these 
unfortunate  victims  of  the  criminal  ambition  of  Lopez, 
a  series  of  hardships  and  miseries,  the  recital  of 
which  would  seem  rather  to  belong  to  the  pages  of  a 
romance,  than  to  be  mere  matter  of  actual  fact.  For 
many  a  long  day  and  weary  night  did  the  wretched 
remnant  of  the  invaders  wander  in  the  denies, 
the  woods,  and  the  wilds  of  this  unknown  and 
to  them  inhospitable  land,  seeking  shelter  in  caves, 
in  holes,  in  trunks  of  old  trees;  without  food, 
almost   without    covering ;    that    which    they    originally wore  having   been  torn   from   their   bodies 
by  the  tangled  thorns  of  the  creepers  and  parasites 
through  which  they  had  to  make  their  way  in  their 
precipitate  flight ;  their  flesh,  too,  torn  and  bleeding 
from  the  rude  contact  of  the  prickly-pear  abounding 
throughout    the   Cordillera ;    forced   to   satisfy   the 
craving  of  hunger  by  eating  the  berries  and  even 
leaves  of  trees;  in  danger  from  reptiles  and  their 
poisonous  bites ;  and,  finally,  tracked  surely,  if  slowly, 
by  the  far-famed  Cuba  bloodhounds.     Their  state 
was  indeed  lamentable.     How  often  did  they  bewail 
the  day  they  yielded  to  temptation !     As  may  be 
readily  supposed,  many  of  the  young  and  tenderly- 
reared   among   them   sunk   and   died   under    these 
accumulated  sufferings  and  privations.     Of  the  500 
who  made  good  their  landing,  about  170  escaped 
with  life  and  were  gradually  caught,  secured,  and 
imprisoned  in  Havana.     Here  they  remained  some 
time,  and  were  at  least  fed,  clothed,  and  their  wounds 
tended.     It  might  have  been  better,  as  things  turned 
out  after  all,  if  they  had  in  the  first  instance  given 
themselves  to  the  authorities,  and  trusted  to  their 
clemency;   but  as  they  all  lay  under  sentence   of 
death  when  caught,  a  proclamation  to  that  effect 
having  been  issued  the  day  after  the  landing  of  the 
expedition,  they  probably  and  naturally  supposed, 
after  such  repeated   provocations,  that  no  quarter 
would  be  given  them.  The  terrible  misery  they  had 
undergone,  however,  added  to  their  youth,  and  the 
obvious  deceit  of  which  they  had  been  victims,  were 
considered  as  sufficient  expiation  for  their  misdeeds. 
The  pain  of  death  was  remitted ;  and,  after  a  com- 
munication of  the  circumstances  to  the  government 
in  the  mother-country,  Queen  Isabel  granted  them  a 
free  pardon,  and  they  were  shortly  after  permitted 
to  return  to  the  United  States,  cured  for  life,  it  is  to 
be  hoped,  of  filibusterism.  .  .  . 
