IT  only  remains  now  on  this  subject  to  recount  the 
fate  of  Lopez  ;  though  this,  being  one  of  the  salient 
points  in  the  history  of  the  troubles  attending  Spain 
at  this  period,  is  tolerably  well  known.  After  his 
final  defeat  on  the  24th  of  August,  he,  with  seven 
only  of  his  companions,  fled  to  the  fastnesses  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  Vuelta  Abajo.  Four  experienced 
bloodhounds  were  placed  on  his  track,  aided  by  some 
soldiers  to  follow  them.  The  glory  of  capturing 
him  fell  to  the  lot  of  a  volunteer  after  all — a  farmer, 
I  believe,  of  the  name  of  Castaneda.  The  blood- 
hounds had  traced  him  to  a  gorge  in  the  rocks  of 
Eosario,  where  his  human  pursuers  came  up  with 
him.  He  was  secured,  and  brought  into  Havana  by 
his  captor,  Castaneda.  Small  space  was  allowed  him 
for  any  of  this  world's  affairs.  Since  1848,  sentence 
of  death  had  been  hanging  over  him;  but  had  he 
been  taken  then,  it  is  supposed  he  would  at  least 
have  met  with  a  soldier's  doom,  and  been  shot ;  but, 
as  it  was,  he  was  condemned  to  die  the  death  of  a 
felon:  and  so,  on  the  third  day  after  his  capture, 
on  the  1st  of  September,  he  was  garotted  on  the 
Esplanade   by   the  Morro.      A   shocking   sounding 
and  still  more  shocking  looking  mode  of  execution 
(judging  from  the  instrument,  which  I  have  seen), 
yet  it  is  far  more  instantaneous  in  its  effect  than 
our  fashion  of  hanging.     And  so  ended  the  eventful 
career  of  Lopez,  and  ends  my  narration  of  it,  which 
has  extended  itself  to  a  somewhat  greater  length 
than  I  anticipated  when  I  began  writing  it.     Though 
necessarily  imperfect  in  some  of  its  details,  from  the 
time  which  has  elapsed  since  these  events  took  place, 
besides  not  having  been  on  the  spot  then  to  hear 
them   commented  on  as  they  occurred,   I  may  at 
least  hope  to  establish  a  claim  to  one  merit  in  my 
relation,  namely,  truth.     The  preceding  account  has 
been  gathered  from  men  of  different  opinions,  and 
who   consequently   looked   upon    these   occurrences 
from  different  points  of  view;  yet  all  have  in  the 
aggregate  agreed,  not  only  as  to  the  facts,  but  with 
little  exception  as  to  the  guiding  causes  of  the  actions 
which  took  place.     Much  I  have  learned  from  the 
Captain-General ;  and  this  might  be  deemed,  therefore, by  those  unacquainted  with  General  Canedo's 
punctilious  sense  of  honour,  a  one-sided  statement ; 
yet  to  all  who  have  had  the  opportunity  of  knowing 
him,  I  need  say  nothing  further  in  corroboration  of 
the  truth  of  any  words  uttered  by  him ;  and  to  those 
who  have  not  known  him,  I  say  merely,  ask  those 
who  have.  Another  person  to  whom  I  am  indebted 
for  much  valuable  and  reliable  information  concerning the  events  which  marked  those  days  of  agitation, 
is  a  countryman  of  my  own,  Mr.  Sidney  Smith. 
This  gentleman,  at  the  time  of  Lopez's  invasion,  was 
secretary  to  the  English  Consulate  at  Havana,  and 
was  what  I  call  on  the  other  side ;  that  is,  his  com- 
passion and  sympathies  were  aroused  on  behalf  of 
the  Americans :  I  do  not  mean  in  the  first  instance 
of  their  invasion,  but  after  the  catastrophe  had  occurred, and  the  sun  which  had  risen  so  brightly  in 
Bahia  Honda  had  set  in  the  prison  of  Havana.  He 
then  did  all  that  mortal  man  could  do  to  alleviate 
their  sufferings,  and  to  soften  the  hardships  of  their 
confinement.  Indeed,  I  am  afraid  his  kind  heart 
would  have  prompted  him  even  to  endeavour  to  save 
Lopez  himself  from  the  garotting  he  so  richly  deserved. At  any  rate,  Mr.  Smith  devoted  himself 
entirely  to  these  poor  prisoners.  He  gave  them 
money  to  procure  better  food  for  the  sick  and  ailing ; 
he  gave  them  sympathy;  and,  better  than  all,  he 
gave  them  his  time.  He  wrote  to  their  parents  and 
friends  to  tell  them  all  that  might  be  told;  and 
many  a  mother's  heart  he  gladdened  by  letting  her 
know  that  her  child  was  at  least  in  life.  Finally, 
by  his  unwearying  patience  and  indefatigable  exertions, he  succeeded ;  and  I  do  not  think  I  am  saying 
too  much  when  I  attribute  to  his  indomitable  and 
persevering  efforts  (at  least  to  a  very  considerable 
extent),  the  ultimate  pardon  and  freedom  granted 
to  the  remnant  of  the  band.  The  people  in  the 
United  States  who  were  connected  with  and  concerned in  these  affairs,  I  know,  share  this  opinion ; 
apropos  of  which,  before  finally  taking  leave  of  this 
subject,  I  must  do  the  Americans  the  justice  to  say 
that  they  have  neglected  no  opportunity  of  testifying 
their  gratitude  and  appreciation  of  Mr.  Sidney 
Smith's  generous  and  kind-hearted  actions  regarding 
their  unhappy  countrymen.  His  first  visit  to  the 
States,  after  the  events  to  which  I  have  alluded,  was 
a  perfect  ovation  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of 
his  journey.  In  conclusion,  it  must  seem  even  to 
the  most  sanguine  on  the  subject  of  the  annexation 
of  Cuba  by  America,  that  whatever  may  be  reserved 
for  the  future  to  bring  to  pass,  it  is  a  futile  and 
utterly  hopeless  dream  to  indulge  in  at  present. 
Without  going  into  the  political  question  between 
America  and  Spain,  or  the  foreign  influence  in 
Europe  which  would  be  brought  to  bear  on  the 
subject  upon  either  side,  it  seems  clearly  demonstrated that  Cuba  herself  wishes  no  change,  and  is 
intrinsically  loyal  to  the  Spanish  government.  Were 
this  not  the  case,  were  the  people  disposed  to  foster 
the  growth  of  disaffection  or  rebellion,  civil  war 
would  ere  now  be  rife  throughout  the  island,  and 
when  quelled  in  one  spot  would  speedily  break  out 
in  another.  As  I  have  had  occasion  to  remark  in 
the  course  of  this  little  narrative,  nature  has  provided every  convenience,  every  facility,  for  resisting 
the  powers  that  be.  A  very  small  number  of  rebels 
could  hold  out  against  an  army,  if  they  possessed 
the  good-will  of  the  peasants ;  but  that  up  to  the 
present  time  has  ever  failed  invaders,  —  filibusteros 
pirates,  et  hoc  genus  omne.  This  is  a  voluminous 
letter,  but  I  shall  send  it  by  a  private  hand. 

Ever  your  affectionate, 

C. 