Havana,  Nov.  20th. — My  dear  Father, — Our  time 
has  passed  very  agreeably  since  our  return  from 
Mexico,  chiefly  in  mixing  with  the  private  society,  as 
there  has  been  a  good  deal  of  party-giving  during  the 
last  week  or  two.  The  hosts  and  hostesses  here  are 
every  thing  that  can  be  wished  for,  and  in  this  commendation I  include  those  of  all  nations.  Indeed  it 
would  be  difficult  to  specify  whether  Spanish,  English, 
French,  G-erman,  or  American  have  received  us  with 
the  most  cordiality  and  kindness.  Mrs.  Crawford,  the 
wife  of  the  English  Consul,  gives  weekly  receptions,  or 
tertullias  ou  Von  s'amuse,  I  must  confess,  far  more 
than  in  our  native  "  at  homes  "  or  the  dansants.  I 
cannot  help  thinking  that  one  cause  of  this  is,  that  in 
England  we  all,  not  only  the  "  budding  misses,"  but 
all  of  us,  more  or  less,  are  constantly  thinking  "  what 
he,  she,  it,  or  they  may  be  about."  We  are  always 
wishing,  hoping,  or  expecting  something,  and,  until 
that  something  comes  or  happens,  we  make  it  a  sort  of 
point  of  honour  to  exemplify  in  another  sense  the 
Irishman's  exclamation,  "  I  will  not  be  pleased,  and 
no  one  shall  please  me,"  instead  of  taking  things  as  they 
come,  or  as  they  are,  and  making  the  most  of  them, 
We  have  spent  also  many  pleasant  days  and  evenings 
with  two  of  the  married  sisters  of  Mrs.  Crawford,  who 
are  married  to  Germans,  and  who  reside  outside  the 
town,  that  is,  in  the  Serro.  The  charm  of  these 
quintas  is  indescribable;  the  freshness  of  the  air,  and 
the  fragrance  of  the  shrubs  and  flowers,  are  perfectly 
delicious;  and  if,  as  sometimes  occurred,  we  went  at 
night,  it  reminded  one  of  a  fairy  tale.  We  were 
literally  lit  "  by  the  firefly's  lamp,"  myriads  of  these 
beautiful  little  earthly  stars  attending  us  on  our  way. 
One  English  and  two  French  men-of-war  are  here 
now,  whose  officers  help  to  enliven  our  tertullias.  We 
went  last  night  to  the  Tacon  with  the  Captain  General, a  grand  gala  night  in  honour  of  Queen  Isabel's 
fete-day.  The  house  was  brilliantly  illuminated 
a  giorno,  and  above  our  box  were  suspended,  for 
this  occasion  only,  full  length  portraits  of  the  Eoyal 
lady  and  her  husband.  Saw  Matilda  Diaz,  a  star  of 
Old  Spain,  who  has  come  to  astonish  the  Havanese. 
But  she  had  been  ill,  and  her  voice  was  still  weak, 
so  no  doubt  we  heard  her  to  disadvantage.  The 
national  air  of  Spain  was  played  and  sung  as  soon  as 
the  Captain-General  entered  the  house.  I  like  it 
very  much.  It  is  in  march  time,  'consequently 
quicker  than  ours,  but  very  inspiring.  I  should  mention  that,  before  the  opera  yesterday,  we  were  takeu 
by  the  good  nature  of  the  Captain-General  for  a  drive 
"  in  state,"  which  was  very  amusing,  as  well  as  agreeable. Every  body  and  every  animal  was  dressed  in  full 
costume,  something  like  our  birthday  drawing-room 
day  in  England.  The  carriage  we  were  in  was  an  open 
barouche,  the  arms  of  Spain  emblazoned  on  the 
panels.  The  interior  seats  and  cushions  were  of  rich 
amber  colour  satin,  and  the  horse's  harness,  caparisons, 
trappings,  &c.  all  gold. 

We  took  an  early  ride  on  horseback  this  morning 
to  the  village  of  Marianao  a  few  miles  out  of  town, 
and  famous  for  the  beauty  of  its  scenery  ;  the  multitude  and  grandeur  of  the 

"  palms  which  never  die,  but  stand 

Immortal  sea  marks  on  the  strand, 
Their  feathery  tufts  like  plumage  rare, 
Their  stems  so  high,  so  strange,  and  fair;  " 

and,  lastly,  for  a  most  picturesque  and  beautifully  constructed bridge  over  the  little  river,  Almendares,  which 
is  in  fact  the  main  object  "to  be  admired,"  say  the 
guide  books,  by  the  various  people  who  make  this 
excursion  from  Havana.  It  (the  bridge)  appeared 
to  me  to  be  very  much  on  the  principle  of  providing 
a  cathedral  arch  for  a  goose  to  walk  under,  the  river, 
or  rather  stream,  appearing  so  completely  out  of  all 
proportion  to  the  magnificence  of  the  bridge  thrown 
across  it.  Rivers  and  streams,  however,  in  these  parts 
of  the  world,  are  not  always  so  quiet  as  they  look,  and 
no  doubt  there  are  sufficient  reasons  to  justify  the 
strength  given  to  this  very  handsome  structure. 
Marianao  itself  is  a  favourite  resort  for  the  townspeople, when  they  want  a  little  repose  or  change  of 
air,  which  here  is  very  pure  and  healthy ;  and  the 
town  being  built  on  the  top  of  a  hill,  the  climate  is 
considered  more  bracing  than  Havana;  besides 
being  more  a  la  portee  of  most  people  than  the  expensive semi-palaces  of  the  "  Serro,"  where  the  rich 
merchants  and  noblesse  chiefly  go  for  their  villeggiatura.  On  returning  to  Havana  this  morning,  we 
arrived  at  the  city  gates  in  company  with  all  the 
donkeys,  mules,  horses,  and  carts,  with  their  respective 
burdens,  going  to  market :  a  busy  as  well  as  amusing scene.  The  sellers  of  vegetables  and  fruits  especially, with  their  extraordinary  yet  musical  cries; 
the  panniers  laden  with  the  weight  of  pine- 
apples, melons,  guavas  bananas,  oranges,  lemons, 
sapotes,  cocoa-nuts,  prickly  pears,  and  several  other 
fruits  of  which  I  cannot  tell  the  names,  heaped  together in  luxuriant  profusion :  then  the  sellers  of 
fish  with  a  still  more  motley  and  incomprehensible 
collection  ;  the  dealers  in  ((  aves."  i.  e.,  not  "  Ave- 
Marias !  "  but  birds  of  all  kinds,  alive  and  dead. 
This  united  collection  of  curiosities,  both  animal  and 
vegetable,  formed  altogether  a  scene  I  should  think 
unique  of  its  kind.  Seeing  the  various  provisions, 
too,  in  this  manner,  was  more  agreeable  than  paying 
a  visit  to  the  market-place  itself ;  as,  in  consequence 
of  the  very  dense  assemblage  of  blacks  in  attendance 
for  the  purpose  of  purveying  for  their  own  or  their 
master's  household,  the  odours  are  not  exactly  those 
of  Araby  the  Blest. 

24:th.  —  The  day  after  the  rejoicings  in  honour  of 
the  queen  I  have  related  in  the  earlier  part  of  this 
letter,  a  very  tragical  event  has  occurred.  Madame 
Domingue,  the  prima  donna  of  the  opera,  a  good 
singer  and  a  very  pretty  woman,  was  murdered  by 
her  husband,  on  her  return  from  the  opera,  where  she 
had  been  performing  one  of  her  favourite  parts.  She 
was  stabbed  in  forty  different  places.  The  wretched 
man  endeavoured  to  kill  himself  immediately  afterwards but  was  unsuccessful ;  he  has  therefore  been 
brought  to  trial,  and  to-day  was  pronounced  guilty. 
Jealousy,  as  may  be  supposed,  was  the  cause  of  the 
crime.  His  hallucination  on  this  point  appears  to 
have  been  carried  to  such  an  extent,  that  I  doubt 
whether,  had  he  been  tried  for  the  murder  in  England 
instead  of  here,  he  would  not  have  been  acquitted  on 
the  ground  of  insanity.  He  seems  to  have  been 
possessed  with  the  idea  that  his  wife  was  unfaithful 
to  him,  and  that  the  object  of  her  fancy  was  the 
Captain-General !  Moreover  he  persuaded  himself 
that  she  was  in  the  habit  of  getting  up  from  her  bed
in  the  middle  of  the  night  for  the  purpose  of  visiting 
her  supposed  lover  at  the  Quinta !  As  all  this  was 
manifestly  a  delusion,  she  having  been  actually  present before  his  eyes  on  some  of  the  occasions  he 
maintained  she  was  absent,  besides  it  being  proved 
that  the  Captain-General  had  never  seen  Madame 
Domingue  at  all,  except  on  the  stage,  it  would  seem 
certain  that  the  unfortunate  man  was  not  a  responsible being.  Still,  I  am  very  much  inclined  to  think 
it  more  merciful  to  society  in  general  to  put  an  end 
to  so  dangerous  a  lunatic  as  this.  Mad  or  not,  when 
one  person  deliberately  cuts  another  to  pieces,  he  may 
well  meet  the  fate  of  an  assassin.  The  authorities  here 
are  apparently  of  the  same  opinion,  as  this  malefactor 
is  condemned  to  the  garotte,  and  will  be  executed  in 
a  few  days.  .  .  .  We  are  going  to-morrow  a  few 
miles  into  the  country  for  the  purpose  of  visiting  a 
tobacco  plantation.  I  shall  write  an  account  of  it  in 
my  next.  For  the  present,  then,  adieu. 

Ever  your  affectionate, 
C. 