Havana,  November  26th.- —  My  dear  Father,  —  We 
have  now  returned  from  the  proposed  visit  to  a  "Vega" 
or  tobacco  plantation,  to  which  I  alluded  in  my  last 
letter,  and  we  have  greatly  enjoyed  our  excursion.  I 
was  anxious  to  see,  and  if  possible  to  thoroughly  understand, all  about  this  very  important  branch  belonging 
to  the  "  Cosas  de  Cuba."  This  ground  of  which  I 
am  now  writing  is  on  an  estate  belonging  to  Queen 
Christina  of  Spain,  who  possesses  a  good  bit  of  property of  one  kind  or  another  in  this  island.  A  very 
important  accessory  to  all  lots  or  portions  of  land  devoted to  the  culture  of  the  tobacco-plant  is  a  river, 
or  running  stream,  in  the  close  vicinity.  Whether  this 
be  an  indispensable  adjunct  or  not  I  could  not  clearly 
discover,  but  the  intendente  who  explained  everything to  me  said  the  cigarros  were  always  much  finer 
flavoured  when  grown  near  water;  and  certainly,  as  far 
as  I  can  recollect,  in  all  the  tobacco  grounds  I  have  seen 
there  was  always  a  rivulet  at  least  of  some  kind  or  another  close  by.  The  proper  name,  by  the  way,  of  what  we 
call  tobacco;  is  "  Cohiba,"  but  in  the  olden  time,  when 
the  Spaniards  first  came  across  the  Atlantic,  among 
other  good  will  offerings  made  them  by  the  Indians 
were   u  tobaccos "   of  the   cohiba  plant ;  that    is  to 
say,  the  rolled  leaf  or  leaves  (cigars  in  short)  prepared 
for  smoking  was  named  by  them  a  "  tobacco  ;"  hence 
the  mistake  arose,  the  Spanish  supposing  the  name  of 
the  manufacture  was  the  name  of  the  plant.      This 
error  has,  however,  never  yet  been  corrected,  and  is  not 
likely  to  be  so,   now  that  long  use  and  habit  have 
sanctioned  the  wrong  appellation.     To  proceed  therefore, tobacco  (not  cohiba)  is  seldom  grown  in  larger 
lots  or  portions  of  ground  than  would  cover  about 
twenty  acres  in  one  place.     I  mean  by  this,  that  one 
proprietor  may  possess  three  or  four,  or  more  tobacco 
gardens  or  plantations,  but  they  are  studded  about 
different  parts  of  his  territory,  and  no  one  of  them 
is  of  greater  extent  than  from  twenty  to  thirty  acres. 
The  principal  reason  of  these  small  subdivisions  is, 
that,  being  a  tolerably  manageable  article  of  culture, 
small  capitalists  may  venture  on  it ;  consequently,  in 
many  and  most  instances,  the  grounds -are  underlet, 
and   rented   of  the    original  proprietor.       Another 
and  very  important  circumstance  in  favour  of  cultivating tobacco  in  preference  to  other  natural  productions here,  especially  for  the  majority  of  European 
residents,  is  that  it  can  be  tended  by  white  people. 
From  six  to  eighteen  or  twenty  labourers,  according 
to  the  size  of  the  lot,  are  sufficient  for  all  that  is  required in  the  management.  Before  the  year  1820, 
tobacco  was  a  government  monopoly,  but  since  then 
this  restriction  has  been  removed  with  respect  to  Cuba, 
a  tax  only  being  levied  on  each  arroba  or  weight  of 
25  Ibs.  In  Old  Spain,  I  believe,  the  monopoly  still 
exists  on  all  grown  in  the  country  actually.  But  it 
was  found  not  to  answer  in  the  colonies.  My 
cicerone,  who  was  good-natured  enough  not  only  to 
explain  in  an  ordinary  way,  but  to  tell  me  all  the 
various  processes  and  stages  from  the  very  beginning, 
said  there  was  little  manual  labour  or  difficulty  in 
its  cultivation,  but  that  it  required  the  most  constant 
watching  and  care,  and,  furthermore,  no  little  exercise 
of  judgment  as  to  the  proper  times  and  seasons  in 
which  to  cut,  to  prune,  to  clip,  to  water,  and  to  thin 
in  quantity,  so  very  much  of  the  after  goodness  and 
delicacy  of  flavour,  whether  in  cigars  or  in  snuff, 
depending  on  their  treatment  in  this  their  infant 
cabbage  state ;  and  this  knowledge  cannot  be  gained 
by  the  laying  down  of  regular  rules,  or  any  distinct 
course  of  treatment,  but  must  be  the  result  of  careful 
observation  and  repeated  experiences.  When  the 
season  of  gathering  arrives,  the  leaves  are  stripped 
from  the  stem,  spread  out  as  flat  as  may  be,  and 
placed  in  packets  of  twos  and  threes  to  dry.  These 
leaves  have  been  divided  into  four  different  classes, 
each  varying  in  its  degree  of  excellence.  Speaking 
of  the  tobacco  plant  as  of  a  cabbage, —  to  which  it 
bears  more  resemblance  than  any  other  I  can  think 
of,—  the  leaves  nearest  the  heart  are  the  most  valuable, and  are  called  "desechos."  Those  immediately 
contiguous  to  them  come  next;  they  are  named 
"  desechitos."  The  two  remaining  qualities,  numbers three  and  four,  are  respectively  called  "libras" 
and  "  injuriados."  They  are  formed  of  the  lower 
and  coarser  leaves  of  the  plant;  the  "libras"  being 
the  better  and  tenderer,  and  the  "  injuriados  "  being 
the  lower  and  external  leaves  nearest  to  the  root  and 
the  ground.  This  last  class,  namely,  the  injuriados, 
are  in  their  turn  sub-divided  into  three ;  called 
"  injuriado  de  repaso "  (which  means  chosen  or 
selected),  "injuriados  primeras"  and  " segundas." 
There  is,  in  addition  to  those  I  have  mentioned, 
another  hybrid  sort,  composed  of  the  slightly  injured leaves  of  classes  two  and  three,  namely,  the 
desechitos  and  libras,  which  go  by  the  rather  contradictory name  of  "  injuriados  buenos."  And  indeed 
I  may  add  another  and  worst  class,  made  of  worm- 
eaten  or  otherwise  spoilt  leaves.  This  is  uncompromisingly and  frankly  called  here  "injuriado  malo; 
but  I  am  by  no  means  sure  that  it  is  not  sold  in 
other  countries  under  a  far  better  sounding  name. 
Having  given  these  details  so  far,  I  will  now  return 
to  the  packets  on  the  drying-ground  before  mentioned. 
When  sufficiently  dried,  they  are  collected  together 
and  assorted  in  bundles,  rather  resembling  sheaves 
of  corn ;  each  sheaf  containing  about  fifty  leaves  of 
number  four,  or  injuriados,  and  twenty-five  leaves 
of  number  three,  or  libras.  These  sheaves  are  in 
their  turn  formed  into  larger  loads,  at  the  rate  of 
four  to  a  faggot,  and  are  then  called  "  manojos."  A 
hundred  and  forty  manojos  constitute  a  "tercio;" 
and  it  is  in  this  form  they  are  sent  away  from  their 
native  earth,  either  to  be  rolled  into  cigars  or  used 
a  la  Yankee,  &c.  Two  tercios  constitute  a  weight, 
called  a  carga,  equal  to  eight  arrobas,  or  200  Ibs. 
This  measure  is  the  one  which  is  charged  for  —  so 
much  a  carga  —  in  questions  of  freight.  Connected 
with  these  manojos,  I  observed  a  curious  purpose  to 
which  the  bark  of  the  palm  tree  is  put.  The  outer 
peel  of  the  stem,  which  is  of  a  kind  of  scaly  substance, being  removed,  it  is  used  as  an  envelope  or 
covering  for  each  tercio,  or  bundle  of  140  manojos, 
preserving  the  tobacco  hermetically  from  air,  damp, 
or  other  injury.  These  envelopes  are  called  in  Cuban 
dialect,  "yaguas."  From  the  above  particulars, 
which  I  hope  I  have  given  with  sufficient  clearness 
to  be  useful  to  those  who  may  be  interested  in  the 
subject,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  first  or  ultra-superior 
sort  of  cigars  must  necessarily  be  small  in  quantity 
compared  to  those  made  from  the  more  numerous 
and  larger  leaves.  Still  it  may  be  satisfactory  to 
know,  if  you  cannot  get  the  best,  what  the  next 
qualities  should  be,  and  also  what  are  good  mixtures. 
The  proportionate  produce  of  the  various  qualities, 
according  to  the  returns  of  the  year  1853,  was,  to 
a  "caballeria"  or  piece  of  ground  of  thirty-two  acres, 
9,000  Ibs.  of  tobacco.  Of  this  quantit3T,  450  Ibs.  only 
(or  one-twentieth)  are  contributed  by  the  desechos, 
or  first  class;  1800  by  the  desechitos;  2250  by  the 
libras;  and  4500  by  the  injuriados.  In  speaking 
of  the  various  sorts,  it  may  be  remembered  that  I 
have  mentioned  some  of  the  leaves  as  worm-eaten. 
On  this  part  of  the  history  of  tobacco  culture  my 
guide  was  most  eloquent.  It  would  appear  that  a 
taste  for  (( the  fragrant  weed  "  is  by  no  means  confined to  the  human  race  :  every  description  of  worm, 
snail,  and  creeping  thing  seems  to  be  addicted  to  the 
habit.  Month  after  month  do  their  depredations 
continue,  and  one  marauder  only  gives  way  to  be 
succeeded  by  another  worse  than  himself.  It  is  the 
injury  and  often  destruction  caused  by  these  insects 
that  renders  it  imperative  on  the  tobacco-grower  to 
keep  such  a  continual  watch  over  his  plants,  to  examine them  narrowly,  and  every  day,  and  to  be  on 
the  look-out  to  discover  and  arrest,  before  it  be  too 
late,  the  inroads  of  the  enemy.  By  far  the  most 
formidable  of  these  insect  adversaries,  however,  is 
the  ant ;  and  of  this  tribe  a  particular  species,  called 
"  vivijaguas,"  are  blessed  with  so  voracious  an  appetite, that  woe  be  to  the  unlucky  plantation  into 
which  they  succeed  in  making  good  their  entry. 
It  is  but  rarely  they  can  be  expelled  before  they 
have  devoured  everything.  I  was  told  —  but  the 
relation  seems  to  me  so  apocryphal,  that  in  repeating it  I  merely  "  tell  the  tale  as  told  to  me," 
not  as  believing  it,  namely — that  the  plague  of  ants, 
having  at  one  time  reached  such  a  degree  of  intensity, that  the  whole  tobacco  trade  was  threatened with  annihilation,  when  some  inventive  genius 
bethought  him  of  importing  a  foreign  army  for  the 
purpose  of  exterminating  the  natives !  France  was 
applied  to  (I  should  have  thought  America  more  to 
the  purpose),  who  benevolently  furnished  a  "  legion  " 
of  ants,  which  speedily  commenced  operations,  and 
by  keeping  the  unfortunate  aborigines  in  constant 
hot  water  by  means  of  skirmishes,  sieges,  and  battles, 
saved  the  tobacco  crops!  In  addition  to  these 
terrestrial  helps,  the  powers  above  come  in  also  for 
their  share  of  praise  and  gratitude.  A  celestial 
worthy  called  Saint  Marcial,  and  whose  prowess  and 
exploits  against  ants  seem  to  have  beaten  Saint 
George  and  the  dragon  quite  to  smithereens,  has 
masses  and  all  manner  of  similar  delicate  attentions 
paid  to  him  by  the  tobacco-growing  portion  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  beautiful  "  Queen  of  the  Antilles.'' 
His  day  is  the  30th  of  June,  on  which  occasion  all 
tobacco-growers  here  go  to  church,  even  if  the  ants 
keep  them  away  on  other  occasions.  In  conclusion 
of  (e  the  great  tobacco  question,"  it  may  be  mentioned 
that  the  quantity  now  exported  annually  from  Cuba 
averages  11,250,000  Ibs.  of  branch  or  leaf  tobacco,  and 
1,250,000  Ibs.  twisted  rolls  or  cigars  (I  speak  now  of 
legal  exportation);  and  the  quantity  consumed  in  the 
island  averages  about  7,500,000,  but  an  immense 
deal  it  is  well  known  is  smuggled  in  spite  of  the 
vigilance  of  the  authorities.  The  parts  of  Cuba  most 
favourable  to  the  growth  and  good  condition  of  the 
plant  are  the  western  and  southern  districts  generally. In  the  east  the  produce  is  of  an  inferior  kind. 
The  sort  called  "  Virginian  "  is  chiefly  grown  here. 
The  proprietor  or  renter  of  a  vega  does  not  depend, 
however,  only  on  tobacco  for  his  livelihood  or  profit. 
By  a  bountiful  provision  of  nature,  the  same  soil  is 
peculiarly  propitious  to  the  constitution  of  the  plantain tree,  which  may  almost  be  termed  the  bread  and 
meat  of  the  labourer  in  the  tropics;  they  roast,  fry, 
boil,  and  dress  the  fruit  in  every  imaginable  way,  and 
can  by  the  addition  sometimes  of  a  little  rice,  or 
chilis,  or  oil,  or  frijoles  (a  sort  of  red  bean  greatly 
liked),  vary  their  food  or  its  mode  of  preparation  every 
day.  In  all  vegas  therefore  the  plantain  tree  holds 
a  distinguished  situation ;  besides,  though  that  is  of 
no  consequence  to  the  agriculturist,  the  general  character of  the  ground  is  infinitely  improved  in  a 
picturesque  point  of  view  by  the  intermixture  of 
these  graceful  trees  with  the  cabbagy-looking  tobacco 
bushes.  It  is  calculated  that  the  number  of  plantains, that  is  to  say,  the  fruit  produced  by  the 
plantain  tree,  exceeds  that  of  all  the  other  vegetable 
productions  of  the  same  class*  added  together.  The 
government,  who  institute  the  most  minute  statistical 
inquiries  concerning  everything,  have  obtained  on 
this  head,  for  instance,  the  curious  computation  that 
ten  millions  four  hundred  thousand  arrobas,  which 
multiplied  by  twenty-five  make  two  hundred  and 
sixty  millions  Ibs.  weight  of  plantains,  are  annually 
grown  in  Cuba. 

*  Namely,  the  Yuca  or  Cassava  root,  the  Baniato,  the  Name,  and 
Malanga,  the  three  last  being  species  of  potatoes  and  yams. 