THE  Captain- General  has  sent  me  a  beautiful  present in  the  shape  of  a  genuine  Havana  fan.     The 
carvings  in  mother-of-pearl  and  tortoiseshell,  executed 
by  the  Havanese  artisans,  are  extraordinary  specimens 
of  fine  and  curious  workmanship,  fan-making  being 
the   principal  and  most   lucrative   branch   of  their 
handiwork.     I  do  not  know,  and  do  not  remember 
whether  any  ancient  chroniclers  inform  us,  if  fans 
were  used  in  Spain  before  the  discovery  of  America, 
though,  j  udging  by  the  manners  and  customs  of  the 
people  here,  I  should  be  rather  inclined  to  think  this 
must   have   been   their   native   place.     During   the 
whole  time  of  my  sojourn  in  Cuba,  I  never  remember a  single  instance  of  noticing  a  native  woman 
or  girl  without  a  fan  in  her  hands.     Of  course  they 
vary  much  in  quality,  but  of  some  kind  or  other,  a 
fan  is  an  indispensable  adjunct  to  the  get-up  of  the 
female  sex.     That  which  I  have  just  received  is  most 
elaborately  and  delicately  carved  in  mother-of-pearl. 
The  intricacies  of  a  design  embracing  fruit,  flowers, 
and  birds,  are  worked  with  the  most  wonderful 
minuteness ;  indeed,  so  much  so  as  to  more  resemble 
those  curious  and  skilfully  cut-out  papers  one  sees 
placed  over  French  plums  or  bonbons.  The  tips  of 
these  finely  worked,  expensive  fans  are,  like  this  one, 
painted  either  on  parchment  or  vellum,  and  are  imported from  Paris,  painting  being  one  of  the  fine 
arts  in  which  the  Cubans  have  yet  to  distinguish 
themselves.  Tortoiseshell,  as  I  have  also  mentioned, 
is  brought  to  as  great  a  state  of  perfection  in  the 
carving  as  mother-of-pearl.  While  on  the  subject 
of  hand  labour  I  must  not  omit  to  notice  another 
manufacture  for  which  one  part  of  the  island,  the 
coast  near  and  about  Trinidad,  is  famous,  namely,  the 
making  sticks,  canes,  and  various  similar  kinds  of 
objects,  of  the  bones  of  a  colossal  fish,  called  the 
"  manati,"  or  sea-cow.  The  manati  chiefly  resorts  to 
the  mouths  of  rivers,  and  shows  a  preference  for 
what  is  neither  quite  salt  nor  quite  fresh  water.  In 
appearance  it  greatly  resembles  a  whale,  but  with 
rather  a  pig-shaped  head.  I  can  only  judge,  how- 
ever, from  pictures,  as  I  never  was  lucky  enough  to 
see  one  either  alive  or  dead.  The  back-bone  is  the 
part  most  generally  used  for  the  articles  they  manufacture from  the  animal,  as  the  purest  and  clearest 
pieces  are  here  obtained.  The  cane  is  of  most 
remarkable  strength,  and  has  the  colour  and  apparent consistency  of  amber,  but  is  far  harder  and 
stronger.  So  great  indeed  is  considered  to  be  the 
danger  which  might  accrue  from  either  a  thoughtless 
or  angry  use  of  it,  that  its  employment  as  a  walking- 
stick  or  weapon  is  absolutely  prohibited  in  the  island, 
a  very  slight  stroke  having  been  attended  some  time 
since  with  fatal  results.  Nevertheless,  it  seems  to  me 
to  be  a  most  arbitrary  and  moreover  useless  measure 
to  forbid  their  use,  as  a  death-blow  might  be  dealt 
with  any  sort  of  stick  if  maliciously  and  violently 
struck.  I  should  for  my  part,  however,  even  were 
there  no  prohibition,  think  their  weight  in  the  hand 
the  most  forcible  argument,  especially  in  a  hot  climate, against  carrying  them  about.  Even  when, 
only  of  the  thickness  of  most  ordinary  sticks,  they  are 
most  unpleasantly  heavy. 

November  30th. — Went  to  the  opera  to-night  for 
the  double  purpose  of  thanking  the  Captain-General 
for  the  fan,  and  also  to  try  my  hand  at  flirting  it  in 
the  proper  Havanese  manner.  I  think  I  have  succeeded pretty  well,  and  shall  no  doubt  improve  with 
practice.  The  only  difficulty  is  to  flirt  it  slowly 
enough,  so  as  to  give  the  long,  drawling  kind  of  rattle 
which  is  so  marked  a  peculiarity  to  be  observed  in 
the  Tacon  assemblages.  A  drawling  rattle  seems  a 
contradictory  form  of  expression,  yet  I  can  think  of 
no  better  term  to  describe  my  meaning.  All  the 
fans,  with  very  few  exceptions,  being  made,  as  I  have 
before  said,  of  mother-of-pearl  or  tortoiseshell,  the 
sort  of  clicking  sound  of  the  opening  and  closing  one 
fan  in  the  orthodox  slow  and  measured  way,  when 
multiplied  four  or  five  hundred  times  and  continued 
incessantly,  gives  very  much  this  impression  to  the 
ear.     Yet,  strange  to  say,  the  effect  is  by  no  means 
disagreeable.     Though  a  noise  certainly,  it  is  a  gentle 
one,    and   actually   harmonises  very  well   with   the 
music.     Apropos  of  national  customs,  it  is  a  singular 
fact  that  the  graceful  and  beautiful  Spanish  man- 
tilla does  not  find  favour  with  the  fair  inhabitants 
of  Cuba.     It    is    the   more   incomprehensible   that 
whereas  in  Mexico,  where  the  Spaniards  no  longer 
rule,  the  fashion  of  wearing   mantillas  among  the 
higher,  and  rebosos  (a  coarser  sort  of  the  same  thing) 
among  the  lower  classes,  still  universally  prevails ; 
here,  on  the  contrary,  though  essentially  Spanish  in 
other  tastes  and  opinions,  a  mantilla  is  never  seen. 
Women,  old  and  young,  drive  about  in  their  volantes 
with  decolletees  dresses  of  all  colours,  the  senoras 
blazing  with  jewels  on  both  neck  and  head,  and  the 
senoritas  with  wreaths  or  bunches  of  flowers.     Also  I 
must  not  forget  a  most  important  item  in  Havana 
toilettes,  namely,  the  cascarilla  powder  which  they 
all,   but   more   especially  the   young,  most  plentifully lay  on  their  faces,  necks,  arms,  and  hands.     It 
is  used  in  the  most  incredible  quantities,  but  without 
the  slightest  attempt  at  disguise :  indeed,  they  say, 
and  no  doubt  with  truth,  that  it  saves  them  from
being  burnt  by  sun  or  wind.  But  the  effect,  espe- 
cially at  night,  is  singular  in  the  extreme.  One  does 
not  always  see  the  powder  then  (indeed,  one  can  very 
seldom  distinguish  it  by  candle-light),  and  as  they 
never  use  rouge,  the  contrast  between  their  magnificent black  hair,  large  dark  eyes,  and  the  snowy 
appearance  given  to  the  skin  by  this  powder,  affords 
a  most  striking  coup  d'ceil  —  particularly  remarkable when  they  are  dancing  at  a  ball  or  tertullia — no 
heat,  no  exercise,  ever  causing  any  apparent  alteration 
in  the  complexion,  or  sending  any  visible  flush  to 
the  cheek.  In  speaking  of  the  Havanese  manner  of 
spending  the  evening,  their  music  or  their  dancing, 
as  the  case  may  be,  I  should  not  omit  mentioning  a 
nightly  custom,  not  the  least  singular  or  romantic  of 
the  catalogue, — I  mean  the  musical  cries  of  the  watchmen calling  the  hours  of  the  night.  To  me  it  is  quite 
an  inducement  to  try  and  remain  awake  for  two  or 
three  hours  for  the  purpose  of  listening  to  them.  They 
generally  begin  by  some  kind  of  invocation  to  the 
Virgin,  coupled  with  the  name  occasionally  of  the 
saint  whose  day  it  may  happen  to  be.  For  example, 
"  Ave  Maria  sanctissima  !  Madre  de  Dios !  y  Santa 
Teresa  Virgen  !  Estan  las  dos  de  la  manana  y  sereno." 
As  it  is  very  seldom  that  the  weather  is  anything 
else  than  "sereno,"  there  is  little  variation  in  the 
latter  part  of  this  oration ;  but  the  tone,  the  melody, 
is  really  beautiful.  The  whole  is  sung  like  an  opera 
"  recitative,"  and  the  last  word  "  sereno  "  is  cadenced 
with  a  "  sweetness  long  drawn  out,"  reminding  one 
of  Mario's  "  Addio ! "  I  must  now  conclude  this 
longish  letter.  I  fear  the  tobacco  part  of  it  will  not 
interest  you  greatly,  not  being  a  smoker.  Still,  as 
tobacco  is  so  very  important  a  matter  in  Cuba,  I 
have  given  you  a  little  sketch  on  the  subject. 

Your  always  affectionate, 

C.