Dec.  2nd.  —  The  time  is  now  rapidly 
approaching,  my  dear  Father,  when  we  must  take 
a  long  farewell,  I  fear,  of  Havana,  as  I  have  promised 
to  spend  Christmas-day  at  Barbados.  Yesterday  our 
old  friend,  Captain  Parker,  commanding  the  "  Dee," 
arrived  here  on  his  way  to  Vera  Cruz.  He  was  detained at  New  York  a  considerable  time,  the  work- 
people there  having  had  a  great  press  of  business 
on  hand.  However,  the  old  ship  looks  considerably 
the  better  for  the  painting  and  decoration  she  has 
received.  We  have  decided  on  going  to  St.  Thomas 
in  her  when  she  returns  from  the  Vera  Cruz  trip. 
This  Captain  Parker  expects  to  be  in  about  a  fortnight. 
Meantime  we  shall  endeavour  to  visit  some  other 
parts  of  this  island,  although  it  will  be  difficult  to 
tear  ourselves  away  from  the  pleasant  daily  routine 
of  our  lives  at  Havana. 

Dec.  5th.  —  The  Fates  have  been  unpropitious  ;  for 
after  having  all  in  readiness  to  set  out  on  our  little 
tour  Tuesday  last,  the  illness  of  the  friend  who  was 
to  accompany  us  has  delayed  us  till  now,  and  now 
our  time  is  short.  To  save  as  much  as  possible  we 
went  last  night  by  steamboat  to  Matanzas,  which  we 
reached  this  morning  (the  6th)  after  a  rougher  and 
more  unpleasant  passage  than  we  have  yet  experienced 
since  we  first  ventured  on  the  Atlantic.  Every  one 
was  ill,  myself  included,  wonderful  to  relate — very  discreditable, I  must  confess,  for  a  twelve  hours' voyage ! 
We  brought  with  us  a  letter  of  introduction  to  Mr. 
Brinckenhoff,  a  gentleman  residing  here  (a  partner 
in  the  banking-house  of  Drake  &  Co.).  This  gentleman has  most  kindly  placed  everything  at  our  "  dis- 
position," and  among  other  things  has  provided  us 
with  saddle-horses.  So  when  it  had  become  rather 
cooler  we  set  out,  and  had  a  most  delightful  ride  in 
view  of  one  of  the  most  beautiful  and  thoroughly 
tropical  scenes  we  have  yet  witnessed  in  our  wanderings. Cumbre  and  the  valley  of  "  Yumuri "  were  the 
two  points  of  destination  in  our  excursion.  The 
word  "  Yumuri "  has  a  romantic  and  mournful  derivation. In  ancient  days,  soon  after  the  discovery  of  the 
western  world,  the  original  inhabitants  of  this  valley were  cruelly  persecuted  by  the  Spaniards  in  their 
fanatic  zeal  for  the  spread  of  Christianity.  After  being 
hunted  like  wild  beasts  from  place  to  place,  bloodhounds were  finally  employed  to  track  them.  In  the 
desperation  they  were  driven  to,  sooner  than  be  massacred in  cold  blood,  many  of  them  threw  themselves 
from  the  heights  into  the  river  flowing  below,  with  the 
wailing  cry  of  "  To  moir  !  "  "  I  die  :  "  hence  the  name 
Yumuri.  It  was  very  lovely,  and  reminded  me  of  the 
far-famed  description  of  the  Vale  of  Cashmere.  We 
looked  down  from  a  great  height  over  groves  of 
palm-trees  (the  trees  of  fairy-land),  orange  trees 
bending  beneath  their  burden  of  golden  fruit,  sugar 
plantations  spreading  far  and  wide,  over  hill  and 
dale,  all  tinged  with  a  colour  the  tropics  alone  can 
show ;  then  the  winding  river,  and  the  bright  sparkling blue  sea  in  the  distance  bounding  all,  formed  a 
picture  not  easily  to  be  forgotten. 

7th.  —  Set  out  very  early  this  morning  by  the 
"  Coliseo  "  railroad,  and  in  about  an  hour  stopped  at 
Cardenas,  near  which  place  is  the  residence  of  a  planter 
to  whose  house  we  were  addressed  by  Mr.  Brinckenhoff. 
They  are  Americans,  and  gave  us  a  kindly  and  hospitable welcome  and  an  excellent  breakfast,  after  which 
we  mounted  our  horses,  and  this  time  took  a  longer 
ride  than  before.  After  a  course  of  ten  miles,  we 
reached  a  sugar  estate  belonging  to  Mr.  Drake,  and 
christened  by  the  American  name  of  Saratoga.  He 
(Mr.  Drake)  is  now  in  Paris,  but  has  left  his  slaves 
and  estate  in  the  care  of  a  superintendent  who 
received  us.  We  went  to  the  sugar-house,  and  saw 
the  whole  process  of  making  the  sugar.  Everything 
now  is  rendered  comparatively  easy  to  the  slaves 
here,  owing  to  the  use  of  machinery.  Perhaps  the 
most  interesting  part  of  the  whole  is  the  first 
process  which  the  sugar-canes  undergo  when  cut 
from  the  plantation  or  field.  They  are  sent  pell- 
mell  into  a  machine  looking  like  a  tilted  waggon, 
by  which  they  are  impelled  down  an  inclined  plane, 
and  when  they  reach  the  bottom  they  are  caught 
in  the  embrace  of  two  huge  rollers  turned  by  a 
steam  engine,  and  by  them  are  crushed  and  ground 
into  shapeless  pulps.  The  pure  syrup  thus  produced 
is  the  "  first  state  "  of  the  sugar.  The  slaves,  malgre 
Mrs.  Beecher  Stowe,  look  exceedingly  happy,  and 
tminteresting.  Mr.  Drake  has  about  600  on  this 
estate.  After  having  nearly  boiled  ourselves  in  the 
sugar-house,  we  mounted  our  horses  and  rode  all 
round  the  estate  and  through  the  plantations.  I 
never  enjoyed  a  ride  so  much,  nor  experienced  such 
complete  novelty.  Far  as  the  eye  could  reach, 
the  sugar-canes  spread  themselves  around  us,  looking 
at  a  distance  like  a  vast  jungle,  —  monotonous,  yet 
possessing  a  beauty  peculiarly  their  own,  with  the 
tender  green  of  their  tapering  leaves,  and  undeniable grace  of  their  feathery  flowers  crowning  the 
canes  as  with  delicate  blue  plumes.  Then  the  exhilarating effect  on  the  spirits  of  cantering  over  the 
soft  turf  through  the  long  glades  cut  in  every  direction though  the  canes.  I  should  never  have  tired 
for  my  own  part,  I  believe,  but  my  steed  demanded 
some  consideration ;  so,  most  reluctantly,  I  wended 
my  way  at  length  back  to  the  house.  We  paid 
another  visit  at  night  to  the  sugar-buildings.  Saw 
the  slaves  at  supper,  and  tasted  some  capital  bread 
and  treacle  they  offered  us. 

8th.  —  Keturned  to  Matanzas  very  much  gratified 
by  all  we  had  seen.  -Mr.  Brinckenhoff  having 
kindly  pressed  us  to  stay  another  day  with  him  and 
his  daughter,  we  have,  nothing  loth,  accepted  his 
good-natured  invitation.  After  breakfast  we  took  a 
walk  about  the  town,  and  along  the  sea-shore  for 
some  distance ;  a  pretty,  bright  scene,  and  most 
agreeable  temperature.  In  the  afternoon  we  visited 
Mr.  B.'s  tobacco  ground. 

9th. — After  having  passed  a  most  agreeable  time 
with  our  kind  hosts  at  Matanzas,  we  this  morning 
returned  by  the  Grumes  railroad  though  Eegla  to 
Havana.  Here  we  found  our  old  friend  the  Captain- 
General  making  his  preparations  for  departure,  his 
three  years  of  government  having  nearly  expired. 
He  and  his  suite  are  to  start  on  their  return  to 
Spain  the  week  after  we  leave.  Sorry  as  I  am  to 
bid  farewell  to  Havana  on  many  accounts,  it  is  some 
small  consolation  that  one  of  the  best  and  most 
valued  of  our  friends  here  is  going  away  too.  He 
has  made  me  a  present  of  two  dear  little  gazelles, 
which  I  shall  hope  to  be  able  to  keep  alive  in 
England;  also  three  very  handsome  specimens  of 
Labrador  ducks,  with  which  I  propose  ornamenting 
the  Chauntry  ponds.  General  Canedo  had  a  small 
menagerie  at  his  quinta,  being  particularly  fond  of 
animals.  These  gazelles  were  his  especial  pets :  it  is 
therefore  doubly  kind  of  him  to  give  them  to  me. 
Captain  Parker  has  most  good-naturedly  offered  to 
take  charge  of  them,  see  they  are  well  lodged  and 
fed  on  board  ship,  and  bring  them  safe  to  England.* 
As  we  shall  be  very  busy  from  now  until  the  time  of 
our  departure,  I  shall  close  this  letter.  If  I  have  time 
I  will  write  once  again  before  leaving. 

Ever  your  affectionate, 

C. 

*  My  hopes  on  this  subject  were  never  realised.  Spite  of  every 
care,  the  poor  gazelles  died  within  a  week  of  leaving  the  tropics.  A 
bitter  east  wind  in  the  English  Channel  finished  them. 