Havana,  December  26th.  —  My  dear  Father, — The 
"Dee"  arrived  to-day,  and  if  all  be  well  we  shall  hope  to 
embark  in  her  to-morrow ;  but  the  last  of  our  sojourn 
here  has  been  saddened  by  a  most  unexpected  and 
melancholy  occurrence.  Two  days  after  my  last 
letter,  a  young  man  of  about  two-and-twenty,  the 
nephew  of  a  gentleman  (a  judge  by  profession,  I 
understand)  who  had  only  arrived  from  New  Orleans 
a  few  days  previously,  complained  in  the  middle  of 
dinner  that  he  felt  ill.  He  was  recommended  to  go 
to  bed  and  take  some  simple  remedy,  it  being 
supposed  he  had  got  a  chill  which  a  night's  rest 
would  cure.  Nothing  more  was  then  thought  of  the 
incident,  and  if  any  anxiety  were  expressed  it  was 
rather  for  the  uncle,  who  was  an  old  man,  I  believe, 
but  I  never  saw  him,  and  who  had  never  come  out  of 
his  room  since  his  arrival  at  the  hotel.  The  next 
day  the  young  man  was  pronounced  better,  and  was 
to  get  up  and  join  us  at  table  at  supper.  He  did  not 
come,  however,  but  about  twelve  o'clock  at  night,  I, 
whose  bedroom  was  next  to  his,  was  aroused  by  hearing moans  and  the  sound  of  some  one  tossing  about 
violently  in  bed.  I  immediately  woke  up  the  mistress of  the  hotel  and  the  servants,  and  the  doctor 
being  summoned  instantly,  the  disease  was  declared 
to  be  yellow  fever  in  its  worst  form.  But  this,  terrible as  it  was,  was  not  so  bad  as  what  followed.  The 
surprise  and  the  sudden  shock,  I  suppose,  of  the  much 
dreaded  "vomito  "  being  so  near  in  all  its  horrors, 
caused  such  a  panic  among  the  inmates  of  the  house 
that  the  morning  had  scarcely  dawned  before  they  all 
took  their  departure,  and  I  am  sorry  to  add  that  of 
many  American  women  who  were  under  this  roof  not 
one  remained  to  help  their  countryman  in  his  hour 
of  need.  The  whole  affair  seems  to  me  like  a 
frightful  dream.  Towards  the  end  of  the  day,  partly 
from  curiosity  and  partly  from  solicitude,  and  moreover not  having  the  slightest  fear  of  infection  myself, 
I  went  into  the  sufferer's  room,  and  there  witnessed 
that  which  decided  me  to  remain  and  tend  him  till 
all  should  be  over,  whether  for  good  or  for  evil.  A 
nurse  had  been  engaged  —  sent  from  the  hospital  - 
a  thorough  hireling ;  and  as  I  entered  she  was  endeavouring violently  to  force  a  spoon  with  some  ice 
in  it  between  the  poor  patient's  teeth,  which,  in  the 
strong  convulsive  fits  which  at  periods  attacked  him, 
nearly  locked  the  teeth  together.  Poor  fellow!  he 
was  quite  sensible  then,  though  he  could  not  speak. 
I  saw,  by  the  wistful  look  of  his  eyes,  how  he  appreciated gentle  handling  and  speaking  to.  Some  hours 
after,  in  an  interval  of  calm,  he  told  me  he  recognised 
me,  and  called  me  by  my  name.  Another  night  and 
another  day  dragged  on,  when  towards  five  o'clock 
it  became  evident  the  end  was  approaching.  I  think 
nearly  at  the  last  he  was  conscious,  as  he  signed  to 
me  to  take  his  hand  and  warm  it  between  mine,  as 
I  had  done  before.  He  then  turned  his  head  away ; 
and  about  half  an  hour  after  that,  the  doctor  pronounced all  was  over — the  pulse  had  ceased  to  beat. 
Now  that  the  reaction  has  come,  and  I  have  time 
to  think,  I  begin  both  to  feel  frightened  and  to 
wonder  if  I  shall  escape,  not  only  on  my  own  account, 

but  on  E 's,  who  was  too  courageous  to  run  away 

like  the  rest.  Still,  though  I  did  not  go  near  her 
during  this  painful  week,  she  was  under  the  same 
roof.  The  Captain-General  has  just  been  spending 
one  last  hour  with  us  to  say  good-bye,  and  in  hopes 
we  .may  all  meet  again  in  the  old  country.  We  are 
to  embark  at  sunset,  dull  and  dispirited  enough  ;  but 
we  must  hope  for  the  best,  though  danger  is  not 
considered  over  for  nine  days. 

Ever  your  affectionate, 

C.