St.  Thomas,  Dec.  21  st.  —  My  dear  Father, — You 
will  be  glad  to  find  by  the  date  of  this  that  we  have 
arrived  here  in  safety,  and  I  am  happy  to  add  that 
the  sea-breeze  and  change  of  scene  have  had  a  very 
beneficial  effect ;  I  am  fast  recovering  from  my  depression, and  hope  I  am  no  longer  in  danger  of 
catching  the  fever.  St.  Thomas  looks  green  and 
pretty  as  before,  though  now  it  has  lost  the  charm  of 
novelty.  The  weather  being  fine  and  calm,  Captain 
Parker  sent  us  in  the  boat  on  an  excursion  to  San 
Martin,  another  of  the  little  cluster  of  islands  belonging to  the  Danish  crown.  San  Martin  is  chiefly 
frequented  as  a  kind  of  watering-place  for  the 
benefit  of  the  residents  in  St.  Thomas  when  they 
wish  to  "  go  out  of  town."  The  Governor  is  now 
here  with  his  family.  Our  principal  reason  for 
making  this  marine  promenade  was  to  avoid  being 
present  at  the  disagreeable  operation  of  coaling, 
which  renders  the  vessel  almost  unbearable  while  it 
lasts,  the  black  dust  penetrating  into  every  nook  and 
corner,  however  well  guarded ;  besides  which  the 
coal  wharf  is  said  to  be  the  most  unhealthy  spot 
possible — the  hot-bed  of  yellow  fever,  cholera,  and 
all  manner  of  diseases.  They  have  a  strange  custom 
here  which  I  should  not  forget  to  mention,  namely, 
that  the  actual  bodily  labour  of  carrying  the  loads 
of  coals  from  their  original  depot  at  the  wharf  to  the 
ship's  side  is  performed  by  women,  whose  privilege 
it  especially  is,  and  who  would  energetically  resist 
any  encroachment  by  the  other  sex.  We  have  just 
returned  from  our  expedition.  The  old  "  Dee  "  is  in 
tolerable  order,  but  the  world  in  general  is  in  a  great 
state  of  dismay  and  tribulation.  You  would  never 
guess  what  has  happened,  so  I  must  tell  you.  A 
ship,  laden  with  ice,  from  the  United  States  has 
struck  upon  one  of  the  Virgin  Grordoa  rocks.  The 
crew  are  all  safe  and  sound,  but  the  ice  has  gone  to 
the  bottom  of  the  sea.  It  sounds  rather  ridiculous 
to  hear  the  lamentations  raised  in  consequence  of 
this  catastrophe ;  still,  no  doubt  we  as  well  as  others 
shall  feel  the  discomfort  of  getting  warm  wine  and 
water,  melted  butter*,  &c.  An  odd  complaint — is  it 
not  ? — to  make  at  Christmas  time  ! 

Martinique,  Dec.  24th. — Since  leaving  St.  Thomas 
three  days  ago  we  have  been  winding  through  the 
mazes,  and  touching  for  a  few  hours  at  many  of  these 
beautiful  Windward  Islands,  or  lesser  Antilles.  St. 
Christopher's  or  St.  Kitt's,  Nevis,  Montserrat,  Antigua,  Dominica,  and  Guadaloupe  were  successively 
visited.  The  islands  of  St.  Kitt's  and  Nevis  are 
within  sight  of  each  other.  The  former,  of  which 
the  principal  town  is  called  Basse  Terre,  is  of 
a  hilly,  rugged  character,  but  wondrously  green. 
One  of  the  eminences  I  particularly  observed  as  resembling smooth  green  velvet,  is  called  "  Monkey 
Hill."  These  animals  are  to  be  found  in  abundance 
here.  A  mountain  peak  about  2000  feet  above  the 
sea  bears  the  unpleasant  name  of  Mount  Misery. 
Moreover  the  fort  and  head-quarters  of  whatever 
regiment  may  happen  to  be  stationed  here  is  placed 
on  one  "  Brimstone  Hill."  Disagreeable  associations, 
I  think,  accompany  both  these  names ;  yet,  as  far  as 
I  could  judge  in  my  short  visit,  there  seemed  nothing to  justify  any  complaints  either  of  the  climate 
or  fertility  of  the  soil.  Nevis  is  most  remarkably 
beautiful.  The  island  appears  to  be  composed  of 
one  large  mountain,  rising  from  the  sea  to  the  sky 
until  its  crest  is  lost  in  the  clouds.  It  is  supposed 
that  the  present  name  of  Nevis  is  a  corruption  from 
"  Nieves,"  the  Spanish  for  "  snow/'  and  that  Columbus, who  was  its  discoverer,  called  it  "  Nieves " 
from  the  white  clouds  hovering  round  its  summit 
and  giving  it  the  appearance  of  being  snow-capped. 
The  vegetation  is  peculiarly  luxuriant,  the  mountain 
side  clothed  with  sugar-cane,  while  graceful  groups 
of  palmetto,  fern,  and  cocoa-nut  trees  detach  themselves  in  dark  relief  against  the  paler  hue  of  the 
canes.  The  steamer  anchored  in  the  small  bay  of 
Charlestown,  a  little  place  scarcely  more  than  a 
village  in  size,  but  which  enjoys  the  honour  of  being 
called  the  capital  of  Nevis.  Montserrat,  with  the 
singular-looking  rock  near  it  called  Kedonda,  was 
next  touched  at,  but  here  we  did  not  land.  A  few 
hours  after  brought  us  to  Antigua,  where  we  anchored 
in  what  is  called  English  Harbour.  The  general 
character  of  the  scenery  to  be  distinguished  from 
this  point  is  not  at  all  un-English,  no  palms  or 
other  essentially  tropical  plants  being  visible,  and 
the  shore  being  rather  flat.  There  are  two  small 
forts  opposite  to  each  other  commanding  the  entrance 
to  the  harbour.  These  forts  are  respectively  named 
Fort  Charlotte  and  Fort  Berkeley.  I  was  in  hopes  of 
meeting  with  the  Bishop  of  Antigua  and  Mrs.  Davis, 
who  came  out  with  us  in  the  (e  Parana"  from  England, 
and  who  wished  us  to  pay  them  a  visit  in  the  course 
of  our  peregrinations.  But  I  heard  that  at  present 
they  are  staying  at  St.  John's,  the  cathedral  town 
of  Antigua,  which  is  about  twelve  miles  off,  and 
consequently  too  far  to  enable  us  to  go  there  and 
return  before  the  "  Conway  "  resumes  her  voyage.  I 
hope,  however,  on  pur  way  back  to  be  able  to  devote 
a  day  to  them.  We  left  Santa  Maria  de  la  Antigua, 
to  call  it  by  its  real  full-length  designation,  at  dusk, 
and  the  next  morning  at  seven  o'clock  found  ourselves  in  the  roadstead  of  the  French  island  of 
Gruadaloupe.  Being  very  anxious  to  see  both  the 
colonies  belonging  to  France  in  the  Caribbean  seas, 
or  as  much  of  them  as  was  practicable,  I  took  the 
opportunity  of  the  first  boat  bound  for  the  shore 
to  place  myself  in  her,  and  landed  at  Basse  Terre. 
It  is  curious  to  observe  how,  in  spite  of  difficulties 
or  obstacles,  natural  or  otherwise,  the  French  always 
manage  to  give  a  sort  of  Parisian  air  to  whatever 
town  or  place  they  may  occupy.  The  first  object 
which  met  my  gaze  on  landing  was  something  very 
much  resembling  a  boulevard, — a  long  street  going 
up  a  steepish  hill  to  be  sure,  but  with  formal  rows 
of  trees  at  each  side  of  the  way.  That  the  trees 
happened  to  be  palms  and  mangoes  was  a  little 
variety  certainly,  but  there  they  were;  there  also 
were  the  gaily  decorated  shops,  the  cafes,  the  little 
marble  tables  and  wooden-backed  chairs.  Basse 
Terre,  moreover,  seems  in  all  respects  a  cheerful, 
flourishing,  and  very  picturesque  town.  The  houses 
are  mostly  painted  in  gay  colours.  This  practice, 
when  employed  in  a  sunny  climate  and  under  a 
bright  sky  like  this,  greatly  enhances  the  beauty  of 
the  outward  appearance  of  ordinary  habitations. 
The  Place  d'Armes,  where  a  parade  was  taking  place, 
struck  me  as  very  like  that  of  Havana,  only  on  a 
smaller  scale.  I  lingered  for  some  time  watching 
the  scene,  enjoying  the  early  morning  air,  and  listening  to  the  merry  strains  of  the  regimental  band. 
We  now  proceeded  to  ascend  the  heights  behind  the 
town,  not  a  very  easy  task,  as  those  boulevard  streets 
whereof  I  have  before  made  mention  are  not  only 
carried  up  the  steepest  of  hills,  but  are  paved  with 
those  particularly  disagreeable  sharp-pointed  stones 
or  pebbles  which  make  one  shrink  at  every  step. 
But  in  due  time  we  were  amply  repaid  by  the  magnificent prospect  afforded  us.  The  Souffriere,  a 
volcanic  mountain  of  nearly  5000  feet,  frowns  over 
the  island  and  gives  grandeur  to  the  landscape, 
while  the  numerous  forests  and  groves  of  trees  and 
shrubs  of  every  variety  of  hue,  gently  undulating 
down  to  the  calm  blue  sea,  shed  a  charm  over  every 
object;  and  even  our  old  tub,  i.e.  the  "  Con  way," 
looked  well,  or  at  least  dignified,  sleeping  on  the 
quiet  waters.  The  Souffriere  keeps  up  a  pretty 
constant  habit  of  smoking,  and  a  few  sparks  are 
occasionally  to  be  seen ;  but  no  mention  is  made  by 
the  inhabitants  of  Gruadaloupe  of  anything  like  an 
eruption.  On  descending  to  the  town  again  we  were 
conducted  into  the  house  of  one  of  the  French 
officials,  I  do  not  know  who ;  but  we  were  regaled  with 
a  most  excellent  dejeuner  a  la  fourchette,  partly 
French,  partly  West  Indian  cuisine ;  but  most  ex- 
cellent and  acceptable  it  was,  hungry,  thirsty,  hot 
and  tired  as  we  were.  (Should  I  be  fortunate  enough 
to  number  our  hospitable  Amphitryon  amongst  my 
readers,  I  hope  he  will  observe,  that  although  a 
considerable  time  has  elapsed,  I  have  neither  for- 
gotten the  incident  nor  his  courtesy.)  We  now 
re-embarked,  bade  adieu  to  Gruadaloupe,  and  towards 
the  middle  of  the  day  made  Dominica.  The  ap- 
proach to  this  island  showed  finer  scenery,  I  think, 
than  any  of  those  at  which  we  have  yet  touched  ; 
stupendous  precipices  rise  straight  from  the  water's 
edge,  but  in  the  interstices  and  clefts  of  the  ravines 
formed  by  them  grows  the  most  luxuriant  vegetation. 
I  do  not  ever  remember  having  seen  such  beautiful 
ferns  as  are  found  here.  Their  variety  seems  end- 
less. The  town  where  the  steamer  calls  to  receive 
and  take  the  mails  is  called  Eoseau.  I  believe  there 
is  a  small  stream  in  the  neighbourhood  which  gives 
its  name  to  the  town,  which,  by  the  way,  is  rather 
difficult  of  access.  There  is  no  harbour,  and  you 
must  land  in  boats  across  a  surf  which  in  any  but 
the  calmest  weather  is  both  disagreeable  and  dan- 
gerous. Roseau,  and  indeed,  I  believe,  Dominica 
itself,  are  not  either  of  them  in  a  sufficiently  flou- 
rishing condition  to  allow  of  the  expenditure  which 
would  be  necessary  for  the  formation  of  a  harbour, 
or  the  building  of  many  other  edifices  which  are 
now  wanting.  There  is  absolutely  nothing  worthy 
of  remark  in  Roseau,  the  view  and  general  aspect 
of  the  surrounding  country  being  the  only  induce- 
ment to  land.  On  the  apparently  flat  summit  of  a 
steep  eminence  called  Morne  Bruce,  the  little  gar- 
rison thought  necessary  for  the  preservation  of 
Dominica  in  the  way  it  should  go,  or  stop,  is 
quartered.  It  must  be  a  dreary  life  for  the  soldiers 
in  spite  of  the  beauty  of  the  scenery.  About  eighteen 
miles  from  here  is  Prince  Rupert's  Bay,  also,  I 
believe,  a  very  beautiful  part  of  the  island,  but 
which  we  had  not  time  to  visit.  Here  tradition 
says  that  the  gallant  Prince  Rupert  died,  and  his  tomb 
is  shown  on  the  sea-shore.*  Coffee  seems  to  be  the 
most  successful  production  of  Dominica  as  far  as 
I  can  judge.  We  observed  several  healthy-looking 
plantations,  and  were  informed  that  the  commerce 
with  the  neighbouring  islands,  particularly  the 
French,  in  this  commodity,  forms  a  favourable  con- 
trast to  other  matters  in  general.  Leaving  Roseau, 
a  very  short  run  now  sufficed  to  bring  us  to  Mar- 
tinique, and  we  have  just  cast  anchor  in  the  Bay  of 
St.  Pierre. 

I  fear  we  have  been  unwittingly  the  cause  of 
much  disappointment  to  the  good  people  here.  As 
we  were  preparing  to  get  into  the  boat  for  the 
purpose  of  going  on  shore,  we  were  attracted  by  the 
signs  of  an  unusual  stir  on  land,  canopies  being 
erected,  crimson  carpets  spread  over  the  ground, 
triumphal  arches  of  shrubs  and  flowers  raising 
themselves  on  high  from  places  where  they  had 
evidently  lain  in  readiness ;  and  lastly,  multitudes  of 
people  hastening  to  the  water's  edge  all  on  the 
tiptoe  of  expectation  of  something  or  somebody. 
As  we  neared  the  shore  and  could  distinguish  the 
countenances,  we  observed  looks  of  blank  disap- 
pointment and  surprise.  The  mystery  was  soon 
solved.  A  new  archbishop  has  lately  been  appointed 
to  the  see  of  Martinique,  and  he  was  expected  and 
ought  to  have  come  by  this  month's  vessel,  and  all 
manner  of  honours  and  fetes,  as  I  have  said,  were 
awaiting  him.  But  the  ludicrous  part  of  the  affair 
was,  that,  whether  from  the  distance  of  the  ship  or  that 
the  expectant  multitude  had  no  telescope,  it  appears 
that  at  first  they  mistook  me  and  my  friend  for  the 
bishop  and  chaplain,  and  only  discovered  their  error 
when  our  proximity  showed  we  were  women !  I 
imagine  this  absurd  quiproquo  must  have  arisen 
from  the  circumstance  of  our  being  both  enveloped 
in  black  silk  mantillas  instead  of  bonnets,  and  these 
at  a  distance  might  have  been  mistaken  for  priests' 
garments.  It  was  too  late,  however,  to  undo  in  a 
moment  all  that  had  been  prepared ;  so  over  the 
carpets  and  under  the  arches  we  walked,  and  thus 
made  our  triumphal  entree  into  St.  Pierre.  I 
must  do  the  St.  Pierreians,  however,  the  justice  to 
say  that  notwithstanding  their  annoyance  and  their 
having  so  much  trouble  for  nothing,  they  showed 
nothing  but  good-nature  and  the  national  good 
breeding  towards  us,  helping  us  and  giving  us  all 
necessary  information  to  enable  us  to  see  as  much 
of  Martinique  as  we  could  during  our  short  stay. 
The  town  of  St.  Pierre  bears  a  great  resemblance 
to  its  sister  city  in  G-uadaloupe,  the  same  cheerful- 
looking  cottages,  the  quays  bordered  with  trees,  and 
the  streets  have  a  similar  boulevard  look.  Mar- 
tinique has,  I  think,  the  advantage  in  general  beauty 
of  scenery.  It  is,  in  truth,  "  with  verdure  clad  "  of 
the  loveliest  hue.  There  appear  to  be  more  palm- 
trees  here  too  than  I  have  seen  anywhere  since 
leaving  Cuba,  and  here  they  seem  to  grow  up  to 
the  extreme  top  of  the  mountains,  and,  as  may  be 
supposed,  much  enhance  the  grandiose  and  majestic 
appearance  of  the  land.  This  island  has  ever  pos- 
sessed great  attraction  in  my  eyes,  from  being  the 
birth-place  of  Josephine,  the  cradle  of  her  che- 
quered life.*  After  our  departure  from  St.  Pierre, 
and  just  as  the  day  was  declining,  we  came  in  sight 
of  the  "  Diamond  Bock,"  a  sugarloaf-shaped  hill  at 
the  extreme  south  of  the  island,  and  the  scene  in 
olden  times  of  many  hard  struggles  between  us  and 
France.  There  is  a  tale  told  of  a  naval  hero  (Captain 
Morris)  having  swung  up  a  cannon  to  the  top  of  the 
rock,  and  so  caused  wonderful  deeds  to  be  done  to  the 
detriment  of  the  French ;  but  it  is  a  tale  so  oft  told 
about  no  end  of  places  in  this  part  of  the  world, 
besides  forming  an  incident  in  one  of  Captain 
Marryatt's  "  veracious  "  novels,  that  I  am  inclined 
to  treat  the  whole  affair  as  a  fiction.  So,  with  this 
apocryphal  anecdote,  I  shall  conclude  my  letter  now, 
it  4  being  nearly  twelve  o'clock,  and  I  am  going  on 
deck  to  see  the  moon  shining  on  St.  Lucia. 

Ever  your  affectionate, 
C. 