Barbados,  Christmas  night. — My  dear  Father, — 
I  have  now  reached  the  goal,  and  attained  what,  since 
leaving  England,  was  the  only  object  of  my  long 
voyage,  the  place  of  abode  of  the  friend  I  crossed  the 
Atlantic  to  visit.  How  far  I  have  wandered  during 
these  five  months,  and  how  little  I  imagined,  on 
setting  out,  the  distance  to  which  my  tour  would 
extend  !  My  last  letter  was  closed  at  the  moment 
we  were  nearing  St.  Lucia,  the  beautiful,  but  deadly. 
We  anchored  for  a  few  hours  in  the  harbour  of 
Castries,  the  principal  town.  It  is  difficult  to  believe 
that  danger  or  death  can  lurk  in  anything  so  lovely. 
I  never  beheld  a  scene  more  magically  beautiful 
than  this,  the  moon  at  the  time  shedding  her  soft 
light  over  land  and  sea.  Yet  the  history  is  too  universal and  too  often  repeated  to  be  false,  which  tells 
us  that  fever,  miasma,  and  death  are  the  habitual 
guests  in  this  plague-stricken  isle,  which  nevertheless 
looks  like  what  we  may  suppose  the  garden  of  Eden 
to  have  been.  Alas  for  romance !  the  only  real 
resemblance  between,  Paradise  and  St.  Lucia  is  the 
"  trail  of  the  serpent  over  all."  Speaking  seriously, 
the  plague  of  serpents,  scorpions,  and  every  description of  poisonous  reptile,  is  so  deadly,  that  even  I, 
who  am  not  easily  turned  aside  from  visiting  or  exploring strange  or  new  places,  have  relinquished  all 
idea  of  landing  at  St.  Lucia,  though  it  will  be  daylight on  the  occasion  of  our  next  visit.  A  little 
before  sunset  to-day,  the  coast  of  Barbados  was 
clearly  discernible,  soon  after  we  entered  Carlisle  Bay, 
in  which  lies  Bridgetown,  the  place  of  our  destination. What  an  extraordinary  and  almost  incredible 
difference  there  is  between  the  external  appearance 
of  this  and  the  island  I  have  been  describing  to  you 
in  the  beginning  of  my  letter !  The  approach  to 
Barbados,  it  must  be  owned,  is  as  nearly  approximating to  ugly  as  anything  in  nature  can.  Flat, 
white,  sandy,  chalky !  This  does  not  sound  picturesque, and  it  is  still  less  so.  In  short,  I  was  very 
forcibly  reminded  of  the  Sussex  shore  near  Brighton, 
but  without  the  town  of  Brighton  to  make  amends 
for  the  dreary  rest  of  the  scene.  We  anchored 
about  eight  o'clock,  and  were,  to  my  great  joy,  almost 
immediately  boarded  by  my  friend's  husband  and 
several  other  old  acquaintances  in  the  36th,  whom  I 
had  not  met  since  we  spent  the  winter  in  the  Ionian 
Islands. 

January   5th. — We  have  now  been   a  week   at 
Barbados,  chiefly  occupied  in  joining  the  festivities 
incidental  to  the  Christmas  and  New  Year  time.  I 
had  always  heard  a  great  deal  of  Barbadian  hospitality, and  I  may  very  sincerely  say  that  it  has  more 
than  equalled  my  anticipations.  As  I  cannot  give 
you  a  detailed  account  of  when  and  where  each  fete 
took  place,  I  must  just  note  down  dinners,  rides, 
balls,  picnics,  &c.,  as  they  come  to  my  recollection. 
But  first  of  all  I  will  give  you  a  sketch  of  our  abode. 
A  charming  little  yellow  cottage,  bungalow-shaped, 
and  raised  from  the  ground  by  a  few  steps,  but  once 
inside,  no  going  up  or  down  stairs ;  all  the  rooms  are 
en  suite. 

Whilst  sitting  in  the  drawing-room,  by  the  bye, 
windows  and  doofs  being  always  open,  we  are  constantly charmed  by  the  visits  of  the  most  exquisite 
little  humming-birds,  who  dart  through  the  room — 
in  at  one  window  and  out  at  another,  like  a  flash  of 
lightning.  The  cottage  is  enclosed  in  a  small  but 
very  pretty  garden  or  rather  shrubbery,  where  grow 
many  a  flower  and  tree  unknown  to  us  except  in 
hothouses  ;  one  particularly,  of  which  I  have  yet  to 
learn  the  name,  serves  the  Creole  ladies  as  a  ball- 
dress  decoration.  The  leaves,  instead  of  being  green, 
are  a  rich  scarlet,  and  being  of  a  very  velvety  texture 
one  can  sew  them  on  to  a  white  dress,  and  thus  make 
an  inexpensive,  and,  to  a  brunette,  a  becoming 
toilette.  Mrs.  P.  has  come  in  Jaden  with  a  complete 
garniture  for  Eleanor  and  herself,  to  be  used  at 
Greneral  Wood's  ball  to-night.  We  rode  on  horseback, a  few  mornings  back,  to  a  village  called 
Speightstown,  about  three  miles  distant,  and  returned to  be  present  at  the  parade  of  the  regiment,  a 
ceremony  which,  as  in  the  Mediterranean,  afforded  an 
opportunity  for  the  gathering  together  of  all  the  beau 
monde  and  otherwise.  Speightstown  seemed  to  me 
to  be  only  inhabited  by  negroes.  I  have  seldom  been 
more  amused  than  by  this  ride,  the  exceeding  drollery of  appearance  they  all  present,  their  talk,  their' 
impudence,  the  songs  they  improvise  about  yourself 
while  passing  them.  The  way  they  set  about  doing 
everything  is  so  perfectly  ludicrous,  I  could  not  help 
fancying  them  a  lot  of  baboons  got  up  as  a  travestie 
on  men  and  women.  Eeceived  yesterday  a  letter 
and  cards  from  the  Governor  of  Barbados,  Sir  W. 
Colebrooke,  and  his  daughters,  apologising  for  not  calling in  person,  owing  to  illness  of  the  former.  With 
this  exception,  I  think  we  have  already  made  the 
acquaintance  of  the  island.  At  a  dinner  party  given 
a  few  days  ago,  I  tasted  the  renowned  Barbadian 
dish  called  "  Pepper-pot,"  and  think  it  well  deserves 
all  the  laudation  it  receives.  I  was  rather  surprised 
at  finding  it  was  served  hot, — I  do  not  know  why,  but 
I  had  always  fancied  it  was  a  cold  galantine  sort  of 
edible.  However,  it  is  very  good.  It  is  made  of 
fish,  flesh,  and  fowl,  I  believe — a  kind  of  gipsy  pot 
au  feu  —  things  being  added  day  by  day.  " 
a  condiment  resembling  Harvey's  sauce  and  anchovy, 
is  a  principal  ingredient  in  flavouring  the  whole. 
While  on  the  subject  of  eating  and  cooking,  I  must 
not  forget  to  mention  one  of  the  greatest  delicacies 
in  the  West  Indian  cuisine,  namely,  "  land  crabs." 
There  is  a  regular  season  for  them.  They  come  in 
swarms  at  one  part  of  the  year,  and  cross  over  the 
land.  They  go  over  everything  in  their  way,  not 
turning  aside  for  houses,  but  go  up  the  walls  and 
across  the  roof.  Of  course  plenty  are  stopped  on  the 
road  and  prematurely  cut  off  from  further  prosecuting their  travels.  They  are,  when  stuffed  and  well 
seasoned,  remarkably  good  eating. 

4th.  —  We  had  a  brilliant  ball  last  night.  The 
general  commanding  the  forces  out  here,  General 
Wood,  with  his  wife  and  daughters,  were  the  hosts. 
There  was  a  good  sprinkling  of  the  navy,  which 
made  a  pretty  variation  with  the  red  coats,  also 
several  of  the  Barbadian  families  settled  here  ;  the 
rooms  were  beautifully  decorated  with  cactus,  ferns 
and  other  tropical  plants,  which,  together  with 
coloured  lights  peeping  from  the  shrubberies 
outside,  heightened  the  beauty  of  the  scene  exceedingly. 

10th.  —  Just  returned  from  a  picnic  excursion  at 
"  Scotland,  "  a  part  of  Barbados  about  fourteen  miles 
from  hence,  which  bears  this  rather  grandiloquent
denomination.  I  believe  the  name  was  conferred 
originally  on  this  place  from  its  being  of  a  slightly 
mountainous  or  rather  hilly  character,  besides  being 
the  only  bit  of  "  scenery  "  of  which  poor  Barbados 
can  boast.  It  is,  however,  remarkably  picturesque, 
a  bluff  headland  of  steep  rock  jutting  out  into  the 
sea.  A  path,  or  rather  I  should  say  steps,  are  hewn 
in  this  rock,  in  the  crevices  of  which  grow  aloes, 
oleander,  cactus,  and  lastly  heather  I  So  "  Scotland  " 
is  not  such  a  misnomer  after  all.  To  descend  these 
steps  to  the  sea  shore,  and  thence  enjoy  both  the 
view  and  the  fresh  breeze,  is  the  favourite  passe-temps 
whilst  the  chickens  and  champagne  are  getting  ready 
on  the  heathery  sward  above.  The  spot  chosen  for  our 
repast  was  under  the  shade  of  some  fine  cabbage 
palms,  with  a  view  in  the  distance  of  Codrington 
College,  a  sort  of  priests'  seminary  for  Church  of 
England  men,  endowed  by  Colonel  Codrington.  Our 
picnic  was  scarcely  ended  before  unfortunately  there 
came  one  of  those  tropical  storms  of  rain  of  which 
Europeans  have  little  notion.  We  had  all  to  fly 
wherever  we  best  could  at  a  moment's  notice;  and  as 
it  was,  some  of  our  party  did  not  escape  a  severe 
wetting.  Those  who  came  off  best  had  taken  refuge 
among  the  sugar-canes  of  a  neighbouring  field,  which 
from  their  height  and  thickness  afforded  tolerable 
protection. 

I  think  by  this  time  you  will  be  of  opinion  that 
my  letter  is  long  enough,  so  I  will  close  and  despatch 
it  at  once,  resuming  my  adventures,  perhaps,  in  about 
a  week's  time. 

Ever  your  affectionate,   
C. 
