Barbados,  January  15th. — My  dear  Father, —  Our 
very  agreeable  stay  here  is  fast  drawing  to  an  end. 
The  island  steamer,  which  will  convey  us  away,  is 
expected  in  two  days  more,  so  we  are  making  the 
best  use  of  the  short  time  that  remains.  We  were 
present  a  few  nights  ago  at  a  coloured  ball  given  by 
the  soldiers  of  the  West  India  Regiment,  quartered 
here.  They  had  invited  both  their  own  officers  and 
those  of  the  36th,  with  their  wives  and  families.  It 
was  a  curious  spectacle  —  at  least  it  appeared  so  to  me, 
as  I  cannot  yet  familiarise  myself  to  the  sight  of  black 
ladies  (as  they  are  very  tenacious  of  being  called)  in 
delicate-coloured  ball-dresses.  I  was  so  amused  on 
the  morning  of  this  ball  night  at  being  called  in 
very  mysteriously  by  one  of  Mrs.  P.'s  women-servants, who  requested  I  would  accompany  her  into 
her  bed-room.  I  went — and  beheld  spread  out  on 
the  sofa  two  wonderful  dresses,  one  a  canary-coloured 
tarlatane  with  four  flounces  and  a  profusion  of  bows 
of  riband,  and  the  other  a  deep  rose-coloured  silk, 
ornamented  with  green  leaves.  Between  these  two 
"  Lydia "  begged  I  would  give  my  opinion  which 
would  "  become  "  her  best,  and  she  promised  to  abide 
by  my  decision.  It  was  a  grave  dilemma ;  however, 
I  decided  in  favour  of  the  tarlatane,  thinking  black 
and  yellow  would  probably  look  better  than  black, 
pink,  and  green.  She  seemed  quite  satisfied  and 
danced  merrily  in  the  evening,  and  I  only  hope  she 
felt  convinced  that  she  was  the  belle  of  the  room. 
Next  day  we  took  a  drive  to  visit  some  friends  residing at  White  Park,  about  five  miles  from  Bridge 
Town.  Though  there  is,  with  the  exception  of  Barbadian Scotland,  very  little  striking  scenery  in  the 
island,  yet  the  near  view  of  the  country  is  pretty 
enough.  There  are  flowers  in  profusion  to  be  had 
for  the  trouble  of  gathering,  and  I  was  tempted  many 
times  on  our  way  to  White  Park  to  jump  out  of  the 
pony  chaise  to  load  myself  with  the  spoils  of  the 
hedgerow.  Jessamine  and  passion-flowers  are  the 
most  abundant.  On  our  return  we  drove  into  Bridge 
Town.  There  is  little,  however,  deserving  of  note  here. 
The  shops  are  poor-looking;  still  the  contents  are 
better  than  those  of  the  other  islands,  I  believe.  The 
principal  "  place  "  is  called  Trafalgar  Square,  and 
has  a  statue  of  Nelson,  The  Cathedral  is  a  tolerably 
good-looking  building,  and  the  Barracks  of  St.  Anne 
are  large,  well  built,  and  provided  with  every  comfort 
required  for  the  soldiers.  They  have  only  very  lately 
returned  to  these  barracks,  as  last  year,  in  consequence 
of  both  yellow  fever  and  cholera  breaking  out,  the 
soldiers  were  all  removed  into  tents  on  the  high 
parade-ground,  and  lived  there  encamped  for  many 
months,  until  all  was  restored  to  its  original  healthy 
condition  in  the  island. 

16th. — We  have  just  returned  from  the  last  visit 
to  be  paid  in  Barbados,  as  our  time  of  departure  is 
near  at  hand.  This  excursion  was  to  dine  and  spend 
the  day  with  the  family  of  a  planter,  Mr.  C, who 
entertained  us  at  their  country  house.  I  have  enjoyed 
myself  exceedingly.  The  amusements  were  varied ; 
besides  walking  about  the  beautiful  gardens,  there  was 
dancing,  swinging  in  hammocks,  and  floating  on  the 
lake  in  small  canoes.  The  dinner  was  given  on  purpose to  show  us  all  the  peculiarities  of  the  best  West 
Indian  cookery.  We  had  callipash  and  callipee, 
pepper-pot  and  land  crabs,  turtle  steaks  and  hot 
pickles,  yams  and  sweet  potatoes,  and  salad  made  of 
the  aguacate  pear.  Then  for  fruit,  guavas,  guava 
jelly,  pomegranates,  sapotes,  custard  apples,  forbidden 
fruit,  and  the  above-mentioned  aguacate  pears.  I 
have  taken  some  trouble  to  try  and  obtain  some  reliable information  as  to  how  aguacate  should  be  spelt, 
but  I  am  by  no  means  sure  even  now  that  I  have 
succeeded.  By  some  it  is  called  avocado,  by  others 
aquacada,  and  lastly  aguacate.  I  have  chosen  this, 
as,  in  the  few  instances  where  any  attempt  at  giving 
a  derivation  has  been  made,  it  was  observed  there 
was  something  about  water ;  therefore,  assuming  the 
derivation  to  be  Spanish,  "  agua,"  being  the  translation of  "  water,"  is,  I  think,  the  more  correct  term  of 
the  two.  The  English  people,  however,  cut  the  Grordian 
knot  by  calling  it  by  the  singular  appellation  of 
"  subaltern's  butter."  For  this  there  is  a  reason,  and 
not  a  bad  one.  Butter  is  not  very  good  and  is  very 
dear  in  the  West  India  islands,  but  this  aguacate  pear 
makes  a  very  good  substitute,  and  at  a  very  small 
cost.  The  taste  is  very  like  ordinary  fresh  butter 
in  which  a  little  oil  has  been  mixed.  Eaten  with 
plenty  of  bread  it  is  very  good,  or  made  into  a  salad, 
as  we  had  it  to-day,  with  a  little  salt,  pepper,  mustard, and  vinegar ;  but  it  is  far  too  rich  to  eat  alone  as 
a  fruit. 

17th. — Took  leave  of  hospitable  Barbados  and  our 
numerous  friends.  A  parting  compliment  was  paid 
to  us  by  the  36th  Eegiment,  whose  officers  themselves 
manned  a  boat  and  rowed  us  to  the  steamer,  which 
was  waiting  in  Carlisle  Bay,  while  part  of  the  band 
followed  in  another  boat  playing  "  Should  old  acquaintance be  forgot." 

20th. — Though  now  we  have  not  on  this  our  return trip  left  the  steamer,  it  has  been  a  great  pleasure 
to  see  again  the  fairy  islands,  for  without  exaggeration they  may  well  be  called  so.  Their  beauty  does 
not  pall  on  the  eye  or  the  taste.  Seen  from  the  water 
I  am  not  sure  that  the  littJe  island  of  St.  Kitt's  should 
not  rank  next  to  St.  Lucia  in  picturesque  and  wild 
scenery ;  but  it  would  be  a  difficult  task,  putting  Barbados of  course  hors  de  combat,  for  any  one  to  decide 
which  particular  one  of  the  Antilles  should  be  termed 
the  most  beautiful.  It  being  daylight  on  this  occasion, I  was  sorely  tempted,  malgre  the  serpents,  to 
invade  St.  Lucia,  it  is  so  wondrously  beautiful ;  and 
the  day  more  than  fulfilled  the  promise  of  the  night. 
The  two  "  Pitons,"  high  sharp- pointed  rocks,  rising 
from  the  centre  of  the  land  straight  into  the  clouds 
apparently,  are  most  imposing  objects.  They  are 
said  to  be  quite  inaccessible  to  human  feet,  and,  as 
usual  with  any  such  natural  phenomena,  frightful 
legends  exist  concerning  them.  The  most  generally 
accredited  story  is  that  they  are  guarded  by  Pythons, alias  boa  constrictors,  who  deal  summarily 
with  any  one  rash  enough  or  unfortunate  enough 
to  attempt  penetrating  into  their  fastnesses.  Two 
foolhardy  English  sailors  are  said  to  have  furnished 
the  last  examples.  They  departed,  determined  to 
ascend  "  le  Grros  Piton,"  and  never  were  heard  of 
more.  However,  all  things  considered,  I  used  that 
discretion  said  to  be  the  better  part  of  valour,  and 
can  only  indulge  the  hope  that  it  is  "  distance  lends 
enchantment  to  the  view."  We  entered  the  bay  of 
St.  Thomas  this  evening,  now  become  a  familiar 
scene.  To-morrow  we  set  out  on  our  southern  expedition ;  and  as  the  "  Parana"  sails  for  England  again 
early  in  the  morning,  I  shall  send  you  this  letter 
by  her. 

Ever  your  affectionate, 

C. 