AFTER  a  long  and  not  over  pleasant  sea  and  land 
'journey  from  Charleston,  we  are  now,  my  dear 
father,  comfortably  "  located "  for  the  day  here, 
namely,  at  Kichmond,  in  a  large,  cheerful,  and,  as 
we  saw  it  last  night  on  our  arrival,  brilliantly 
lighted  hotel.  But  before  saying  anything  of  this 
place,  I  must  begin  at  the  beginning,  and  chronicle 
our  movements  since  I  last  wrote.  Our  departure 
from  Charleston  did  not,  for  some  reason  best 
known  to  the  powers  on  board  the  steamer,  take 
place  till  the  afternoon,  instead  of  the  morning; 
the  sky  was  lowering,  atmosphere  oppressive,  and 
boat  crowded ;  and  to  make  matters  better,  when  we 
had  been  about  four  hours  at  sea,  we  met  with  a 
Job's  comforter,  in  the  shape  of  the  chief  engineer 
of  the  vessel,  who  informed  us  that  the  particular 
point  we  were  then  turning,  and  which  bore  the 
ominous  name  of  Cape  Fear,  was  the  most  dangerous 
spot  on  all  the  southern  coast ;  that  the  heavy  cloud 
we  saw  "  looming  in  the  distance,"  was  the  probable 
forerunner  of  a  squall ;  also,  that  a  vessel,  for  which 
the  one  we  were  on  board  was  a  substitute,  had  been 
lost  on  just  such  a  night  as  this,  on  her  return 
voyage,  having  previously,  however,  landed  Jenny 
Lind  in  safety  on  the  outward  bound  trip.  Here 
was  a  pretty  catalogue  of  disasters  !  Decidedly  our 
friend  must  have  had  the  mischievous  design  of 
upsetting  our  nerves  :  notwithstanding  all  these  black 
prognostications,  the  night  passed  without  any  misadventure, and  we  reached  Wilmington  yesterday 
morning  in  safety ;  a  busy-looking,  commercial  town, 
but  containing  nothing  worthy  of  note  in  other 
respects.  It  owes  its  rise,  if  not  its  existence,  to 
being  the  terminus  of  the  immense  line  of  railroad 
from  north  to  south  of  the  United  States.  To  make 
up  for  the  absence  of  the  threatened  gale  of  wind 
at  night,  the  rain  poured  down  with  such  extreme 
violence,  that  in  walking  over  the  short  space  of 
about  twenty  yards  from  the  landing  to  the  railway 
train,  where  the  "  cars  "  were  in  waiting,  we  got 
completely  wet  through.  The  carriages,  or  cars  as 
they  are  called  here,  differ  considerably  in  their 
construction  from  those  on  the  European  railroads. 
Each  car  is  of  exceeding  length,  and  instead  of  being 
in  compartments  with  doors  at  the  sides,  you  enter 
at  the  back,  and  find  a  lane,  on  the  principle  of  the 
aisle  of  a  church,  straight  through  the  centre  of  the 
car,  with  rows  of  benches  on  either  side  for  the 
accommodation  of  the  passengers.  These  benches  have 
reversible  backs;  so  that  you  may  sit  fronting  the 
engine  or  not  as  you  prefer.  I  am  not  sure  on  the 
whole  that  I  like  these  American  cars ;  it  seems  to 
me  that  you  are  not  sufficiently  protected  against 
the  weather  ;  there  are  no  means  of  ventilation, 
except  by  keeping  the  windows  open ;  and  this  necessarily, of  course,  let  in  a  quantity  of  wet  in  the 
beginning  of  the  journey.  By  and  by  as  we  proceeded the  rain  ceased,  and  the  sun  began  absolutely 
to  blaze, — shine  is  too  mild  an  expression.  The  heat 
and  dust  then  became  insufferable  ;  added  to  which, 
the  ashes  and  cinders  from  the  engine  blew  in  upon 
us  in  showers,  penetrating  every  nook  and  corner, 
and  certainly  neither  contributing  to  our'  comfort 
nor  cleanliness.  We  looked  like  a  set  of  sweeps 
before  reaching  our  journey's  end.  In  other  respects 
the  regulations  are  good  enough.  The  travelling  is 
fast,  very  cheap,  and  lastly,  all  the  people,  employes, 
and  others  are  kindly  and  civilly  disposed  towards 
women.  The  general  aspect  of  the  country  we  have 
traversed  is  strange  and  wild.  We  have  passed  over 
upwards  of  300  miles  of  one  nearly  unvaried  scene, 
trees  and  water,  water  and  trees.  Every  now  and 
then  a  small  clearance  had  been  made,  the  stumps 
being  left,  showing  where  the  trees  had  been ;  and 
two  or  three  houses  were  built,  rarely  more ;  but  a 
very  few  years,  they  tell  me,  will  suffice  to  convert 
these  small  beginnings  into  considerable  towns.  The 
grand  old  names  belonging  to  some  of  these  embryo 
"  cities "  are  at  times  ludicrous.  Warsaw,  for  instance, consists  of  exactly  four  houses.  I  should  not 
omit  to  mention  that  the  line  of  railroad  I  have  just 
been  describing  is  laid  along  the  outskirts  or  margin 
of  the  great  morass  immortalised  by  Moore's  poetry, 
called  "The  Lake  of  the  Dismal  Swamp,"  which 
will  account  for  the  aquatic  character  of  the  greater 
portion  of  the  route.  Dismal  enough  it  looked 
certainly,  especially  as  night  drew  on.  The  last 
cheerful-looking  place  we  saw  was  called  Petersburg, 
where  we  stopped  for  refreshment,  a  pretty,  green- 
looking  spot,  and  apparently  in  a  thriving  condition. 
About  two  hours  before  arriving  at  Richmond,  it 
being  then  quite  dark,  we  had  to  cross,  by  means 
of  a  very  long  bridge,  a  dreary  marsh  or  fen  water 
surrounding  us  on  every  side,  and  the  extreme  distance only  bounded  by  the  dark  outline  of  a  sombre 
forest ;  our  train  looking  like  a  thread  on  the  waste 
of  waters:  the  scene  was  altogether  appalling,  and 
greatly  relieved  I  felt  when  we  had  safely  crossed  it. 
By  day,  no  doubt,  it  would  look  less  terrible,  but  the 
effect  at  night  is  by  no  means  pleasant.  I  had 
nearly  forgotten  to  tell  you  of  a  curious  notice  I  saw 
posted  up  at  the  railway  station  at  Wilmington.  It 
purported  to  state  the  fares  on  some  short  line,  I 
cannot  tell  what,  between  Wilmington  and  whatever 
the  place  may  have  been.  It  ran  thus  :  "  (rents  and 
ladies  75  cents,  children  and  slaves  35  cents  !  "  As 
you  are  aware,  there  is  no  first  or  second  class  in 
American  travelling.  Persons,  therefore,  are  charged 
all  equally,  but  children  and  slaves  it  should  appear 
do  not  count.  Eichmond,  where  we  arrived  at  length 
last  night,  is  the  capital  town  of  Virginia,  and  is 
remarkably  picturesque  in  its  general  character. 
The  private  houses,  as  well  as  many  of  the  public 
buildings,  are  mostly  enclosed  in  ornamental  grounds, 
planted  with  shrubs  and  trees.  These,  together  with 
there  being  a  waterfall  in  the  immediate  vicinity, 
the  falls  of  the  James  Biver,  on  which  the  town  is 
built,  combine  to  render  Eichmond  somewhat  more 
of  a  show  place  than  might  be  expected  of  a  manufacturing town.  We  paid  a  short  visit  to  the  capitol, 
which  stands  in  the  midst  of  a  very  tastefully-planted 
square  or  park,  serving  as  a  pleasure-ground  and 
promenade  for  the  public.  Clumps  and  avenues 
of  fine  trees,  with  a  quantity  of  grass-plots  intersected with  paths  and  gravel-walks.  Inside  the 
building  there  stands  facing  you  as  you  enter  the 
hall,  a  well-executed  statue  of  Washington  in  white 
marble.  I  do  not  know  the  sculptor's  name, — indeed, 
to  tell  the  truth,  I  forgot  to  ask.  There  are  several 
cotton  factories  here,  but  the  principal  source  of 
industry  is  tobacco.  About  fifty  manufactories  are 
in  action  at  the  present  moment,  each  employing 
an  average  of  150  to  200  hands,  black  hands,  of 
course ;  and  I  am  told  that  both  the  population  and 
commercial  prosperity  of  Richmond  are  steadily 
increasing  every  year.  To-morrow  we  proceed  northwards, and  expect  to  reach  Washington,  so  I  will 
write  no  more  to  you  now,  but  take  up  my  narrative 
again  when  our  journey  thither  is  accomplished. 