Navy  Bay,  January  27th. — My  dear  Father, — 
After  a  voyage  of  nearly  a  week's  duration,  we 
landed  here  about  midday.  Though  but  a  small 
place  (in  point  of  size,  indeed,  it  is  scarcely  more 
than  a  village),  this  enjoys  the  distinction  of  having 
no  less  than  three  names :  Navy  Bay  by  the  English, 
Colon  by  the  Spanish,  Aspinwall  by  the  Americans, 
are  the  appellations  severally  bestowed  on  it.  The 
aspect  of  the  town  is  singular.  The  houses  look  like 
a  collection  of  booths,  or  those  cardboard  houses 
made  for  children's  toys,  into  the  very  midst  'of 
which,  as  I  was  contemplating  the  scene,  came 
shrieking  and  whirling  the  Panama  train,  with  its 
odd  reverse-looking  chimney,  bringing  back  vividly 
to  my  recollection  the  cars  of  the  "  blessed  States." 
We  are  about  to  bid  adieu  for  a  time  to  the  Atlantic 
and  the  "  Bonnie  Dee  "  here,  and  to  try  our  fortunes 
on  the  Pacific.  As  we  have  but  a  short  time  to  spare, 
I  shall  send  you  the  diary  I  have  written  since 
leaving  St.  Thomas ;  meanwhile  I  must  try  and  get 
some  information  concerning  things  in  general,  connected with  our  future  movements.  It  seems  very 
strange  that  notwithstanding  the  pretty  constant 
communication  which  now  takes  place  between  the 
two  sides  of  the  Isthmus,  so  little  intelligence 
can  be  obtained  about  the  South  Pacific  route. 
All  that  I  can  positively  make  out  is,  that  the 
steamboats  bound  for  Lima  and  Valparaiso  leave 
Panama  on  the  7th  and  21st  of  each  month ;  but 
for  all  details  I  must  wait  till  we  are  across  the 
Isthmus. 

On  the  21st  of  January  we  left  St.  Thomas  at  daylight, a  very  high  wind,  almost  a  gale,  blowing.  In 
a  few  hours  we  were  out  of  sight  of  land. 

24th. — We  were  aroused  this  morning  before 
five  o'clock,  in  order  to  see  the  sun  rise  upon  the 
Sierra  Nevada,  and  to  enjoy  the  first  sight  of  the 
continent  of  South  America.  I  could  just  discern 
the  snow  edging  the  sharp  summits  of  the  mountain chain  ;  but  unfortunately  the  sun,  although 
generally  rather  too  bright  than  too  dim  in  these 
climes,  was  to-day  enveloped  in  vapour  and  mist, 
and  although  he  went  through  the  ceremony  of 
rising,  he  lacked  the  brilliancy  which  usually  distinguishes him.  This  Sierra  Nevada  is  a  branch  of 
the  great  chain  of  the  Andes,  and  is  called  La 
Sierra  de  Santa  Martha,  at  the  town  of  which  we 
arrived  about  10  A.M.,  and  anchored  in  the  bay.  I 
was  both  surprised  and  delighted  at  the  magnificent 
spectacle  which  met  my  eyes  on  going  on  deck.  Not 
having  heard  any  one  talk  of  or  praise  Santa  Martha 
particularly,  I  was  totally  unprepared  for  such  a 
scene.  I  think  the  voyage  well  worth  the  trouble 
between  St.  Thomas  and  this,  even  were  we  to  see 
nothing  else.  Hills  that  without  any  exaggeration 
might  well  be  called  mountains  rise  straight  up  from 
the  water's  edge.  The  waves  dash  themselves  in 
fury  against  the  rocky  shore,  whilst  all  around,  far  as 
the  eye  can  reach,  peak  rises  above  peak,  of  every 
imaginable  form,  till  they  are  gradually  lost  in  the 
clouds.  Captain  Parker  allowed  us  time  to  go  on 
shore,  and  we  took  a  walk  all  about  the  town  for  upwards of  an  hour.  But  there  is  literally  nothing  to 
be  seen  in  it ;  even  the  cathedral  was  closed,  and  the 
whole  place  seemed  deserted.  The  heat  of  Santa 
Martha  surpasses  all  I  ever  experienced  or  suffered 
elsewhere.  After  perambulating  the  town  for  as  long 
as  we  were  able  to  endure  baking,  we  took  boat 
again,  and  returned  home  to  the  "  Dee,"  when  we 
gladly  accepted  the  refreshment  of  some  iced  champagne and  seltzer-water  after  our  fatiguing  excursion. 
It  is  blowing  tremendously,  but  I  understand  it  is  by 
no  means  unusual  weather  on  this  part  of  the  coast. 
We  proceeded  on  our  voyage  at  sunset  to-day,  and 
hope  to  reach  Cartagena  in  the  morning.  We  have 
left  at  Santa  Martha  a  large  party  who  had  made  the 
voyage  from  St.  Thomas  with  us, — an  English  merchant and  his  family,  who  are  going  to  settle  at 
Bogota.  They  expect  to  reach  the  latter  in  eight 
days.  They  will  have  several  hundred  miles'  travelling on  the  great  Magdalena  river,  but  I  should  fear 
will  meet  many  difficulties,  as,  besides  a  tolerably 
numerous  party  in  themselves,  children,  and  servants, 
they  comprehend  a  small  edition  of  Noah's  ark, 
horses,  dogs,  cows,  sheep,  poultry;  also  carriages, 
carts,  saddles,  and  bridles. 

25th. — We  did  not,  after  all,  arrive  at  Cartagena 
until  nearly  five  o'clock  P.M.,  for  although  the  wind 
was  fair  it  was  anything  but  light,  and  the  swell  was 
tremendous.  I  was  not  sorry  for  the  delay,  however, 
as  it  enabled  us  to  see  by  daylight  what  is  generally 
passed  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  namely,  the  mouth 
of  the  great  river  Magdalena.  As  I  unfortunately 
missed  "  the  father  of  waters "  in  the  north,  the 
Mississippi,  being  too  "  yellow-feverish,"  I  am  glad 
at  least  to  have  the  opportunity  of  beholding  one  of 
the  principal  South  American  rivers.  One  would 
hardly  guess  the  Magdalena  at  its  embouchure, 
however,  to  be  anything  but  a  lake :  indeed,  it  is 
difficult  at  first  to  distinguish  it  from  the  ocean  which 
it  joins.  Our  first  view  of  Cartagena  was  just  "in 
the  light  of  declining  day."  From  the  sea  its  appearance is  very  fine,  and  greatly  reminded  me  of 
the  appearance  of  Venice  from  the  lagunes.  In  order 
to  enter  the  harbour  of  Cartagena  a  great  detour 
must  be  made,  by  which,  to  all  appearance,  the  city 
is  left  far  behind.  We  steamed  along  a  narrow 
channel  called  the  Boca  Chica,  or  little  mouth,  and 
after  proceeding  for  about  nine  miles,  but  in  perfectly smooth  water,  in  an  exactly  contrary  direction 
to  our  previous  course,  we  suddenly  found  ourselves 
in  the  bay,  where  our  good  ship  speedily  anchored 
herself.  A  very  curious  hill  or  mountain  rises  immediately above  this  town,  and  is  called  the  "  Popa," 
from  its  resemblance  to  the  prow  of  a  ship.  We 
have  not  been  able  to  see  much  of  the  city  of  Cartagena, as,  by  the  time  the  indispensable  preliminaries 
were  settled  attendant  on  the  arrival  of  the  packet, 
the  mails  landed,  and  matters  in  order,  it  was 
sunset.  We  went  on  shore,  however,  and  were  introduced by  Captain  Parker  to  the  English  Consul,  Mr. 
Kortright,  with  whom  we  spent  the  evening ;  he  has 
a  delightful  house,  with  a  gallery  going  round  it, 
whence  one  looks  down  upon  the  most  refreshing 
green  shrubs  and  brilliant-hued  flowers :  and  apropos 
of  hues,  he  possesses  a  beautiful  and,  I  should  think, 
most  valuable  collection  of  birds  all  netted  here,  that 
is  to  say  in  New  Granada,  of  which  republic  Cartagena is  the  seaport,  and  Bogota  the  capital.  It  is 
scarcely  possible  to  imagine  or  believe,  without  seeing,  the  wonderful  variety  of  shades  and  tints,  shining 
and  sparkling  like  gems,  on  the  wings  of  these  lovely 
creatures.  I  must  not  omit  to  mention  also  a  very 
magnificent  preserved  butterfly,  which  was  under  a 
glass  shade,  ornamenting  Mr.  Kortright's  drawing- 
room  table,  measuring  upwards  of  twelve  inches  from 
wing  to  wing,  of  a  glowing  cobalt-blue  colour,  spotted 
with  silver.  Our  host  has  kindly  volunteered  to 
show  us  some  of  the  lions  of  Cartagena  to-morrow 
morning,  provided  the  powers  that  rule  the  "  Dee  " 
and  her  movements  should  be  propitious  and  allow 
us  a  few  hours ;  or  if  not,  the  engagement  is  to  hold 
good  on  our  return  next  month. 

26th. — We  were  obliged  to  relinquish  our  intended 
drive  into  the  country  this  morning,  as  the  "  Dee  " 
was  up,  steam  and  all,  betimes,  and  we  got  under  way 
between  eight  and  nine  A.M.  Wind  still  high,  and 
the  swell  great,  but  not  quite  so  bad  as  it  has  been.— 
To  resume  my  letter.  We  have  now  located  ourselves for  to-day  at  the  "  City  Hotel,"  a  wonderful 
structure  made  entirely  of  wood,  not  thicker  than 
pasteboard.  I  do  not  at  all  fancy  sleeping  in  such  a 
place,  for  fear  of  its  catching  fire.  Nevertheless  we 
shall  be  under  the  necessity  of  doing  so  for  one  night. 
We  have  just  been  introduced  to  a  Mr.  Stevenson, 
the  stepson  of  Mr.  Cowan,  the  English  Consul.  He 
is  going  to-morrow,  and  has  kindly  undertaken  to 
chaperone  us  in  our  journey  across  the  Isthmus.  So 
now  farewell.  I  will,  if  all  be  well,  send  you  a  letter 
from  Panama.  The  heat  here  is  intense,  far  greater 
than  we  have  yet  experienced  anywhere  in  the  course 
of  our  wanderings. 

Ever  your  affectionate, 
C. 