January  28th,  Navy  Bay. — My  dear  Father, — Although I  shall  not  send  this  letter  till  we  are  on  the 
other  side  of  the  Isthmus,  I  shall  resume  my  notes 
at  once,  partly  for  occupation's  sake,  especially  during 
this  long  day  of  waiting  here.  Shortly  after  the 
despatch  of  my  last,  the  signal  for  sailing  was  made, 
and  at  length  came  the  parting  hour,  when  the 
friends  and  companions  of  many  a  weary  mile  were 
to  leave  us,  and  the  farewell  was  spoken.  I  can 
hardly  describe  to  you  the  feeling  of  desolation 
which  we  experienced  for  a  short  period  as  we 
watched  the  "  Dee  "  till  she  gradually  faded  out  of 
sight,  then  turned  to  find  ourselves  quite  alone, 
standing  between  two  oceans  and  two  continents. 
Our  solitary  reflections  were,  however,  soon  unceremoniously interrupted  by  the  clamorous  tones  of  the 
dinner  bell,  and  being  driven  in  to  feed  in  a  style  more 
than  ever  reminding  me  of  the  States.  By  the  time 
we  reached  the  dinner-room  we  found  the  hungry 
claimants  had  already  nearly  cleared  the  tables,  and 
very  shortly  after  they  had  vanished  from  the  scene 
as  well  as  the  food,  with  a  celerity  which  had  something of  the  miraculous. 

29th. — Embarked  on  the  railroad,  though  in  rather 
a  novel  mode  of  conveyance,  namely,  the  baggage 
waggon.  But  it  was  Sunday,  and  the  good  Yankees 
were  too  good  to  accommodate  passengers  with  a  carriage on  that  day,  though  they  sent  a  luggage  car  ;  but 
then  if  they  had  not  done  that,  sundry  dollars  would 
have  been  sacrificed,  and  so  they  pocketed  their  principles to  the  extent  of  forwarding  the  "  Dee's  "  cargo, 
and  also  allowed  us  by  a  great  favour,  and  in  consideration of  our  paying  first-class  prices,  to  sit  on  our 
boxes  in  the  said  waggon.  We  preferred  doing  this, 
however,  and  having  the  advantage  of  Mr.  Stevenson's 
escort,  to  waiting  till  the  next  day,  and  coming  with  the 
crush  of  Californians  who  were  expected  to  arrive  by 
the  American  steamer.  The  road  is  a  narrow  cutting 
through  heavy  masses  of  damp  rich-looking  jungle, 
with  interminable  forests  spreading  far  and  wide  in  the 
distance,  and  all  covered  and  interlaced  with  the  same 
sort  of  beautiful  creepers  and  parasites  we  had  so  much 
admired  in  Mexico.  In  about  two  hours  we  reached 
a  small  "  station  "  or  settlement,  consisting  of  two  or 
three  small  Indian  huts  called  Caravali.  Here  we 
left  the  railroad,  which  however  is  open  some  distance further  (as  far  as  Grorgona);  but  our  chaperon 
having  his  own  boat,  and  always  employing  this 
means  of  conveying  the  silver  and  "  treasure/'  as  it 
is  called,  with  which  he  is  intrusted  by  the  company, 
we  embarked  with  him  on  the  river  Chaores. 


During  the  delay  which  took  place  here  while  the 
cargo  was  being  shipped,  we  had  an  amusing  scene. 
The  wildness  and  novelty  of  the  whole  affair  induced 
me  to  attempt  a  little  sketch.  First  came  ourselves 
seated  on  a  plank  under  the  shade  of  a  tree,  then  the 
winding  river,  the  odd-shaped  canoes,  and  the  all 
but  naked  boatmen,  some  sleeping,  a  few  working, 
some  eating,  and  others  taking  sudden  plunges  into 
the  water  and  diving  like  ducks.  Close  to  ourselves 
the  occupations  were  still  more  varied.  The  extraordinary-looking Indian  women  were  several  of  them 
cooking  soup  and  other  savoury  messes  on  a  very 
primitive  sort  of  batterie  de  cuisine,  consisting  of  a 
few  sticks  laid  on  a  few  stones,  and  a  black  mysterious- 
looking  cauldron  crowning  the  whole  edifice,  out  of 
which  pot-luck  was  doled  to  all  suppliants  by  the 
various  artistes, — I  cannot  call  them  "  fair,"  as  their 
complexions  varied  from  a  bright  chocolate  colour  to 
the  deepest  jet.  But  their  costume  was  truly  unique — 
full-dress  low  bodices  and  short  sleeves  to  their  gowns, 
their  woolly  locks  hanging  in  wild  luxuriance  about 
their  necks  and  shoulders,  and  profusely  ornamented 
with  natural  flowers,  beads,  combs,  gold  and  silver. 
By  way  of  variety,  another  group,  composed  of  some 
half-dozen  people,  were  occupied  playing  cards  as  if 
for  their  lives,  so  intent  were  they  on  their  game. 
These  looked  especially  picturesque,  as,  in  order  to 
shield  themselves  from  the  burning  rays  of  the  sun, 
they  had  thrown  a  boat's  sail  over  three   or   four 
poles,  and  under  its  shade  they  had  encamped  themselves.    I  had  begun  to  try   and   sketch  with  my 
pencil  a  few  of  the  principal  points  in  this  tableau, 
when  one  or  two  of  the  Indians  having  perceived 
what  I  was  about,  gave  utterance  to  some  exclamations of  astonishment,  which  speedily  attracted  the 
whole  community   round   me,   and  then   ensued   a 
really  laughable  scene,  which,  I  take  it,  quite  exemplifies the  vanity   inherent  in  our   human   nature. 
They  all,  men  as  well  as  women  and  children,  began 
to  put  themselves  into  what  they  considered  the  most 
engaging  and  favourable   attitudes,   and   begged  I 
would  take  their  likenesses.     At  last,  the  boat  being 
ready,  we   embarked  in  it,   and   had   a   somewhat 
tedious  voyage  up  the  river  for  five  hours  to  Cruces, 
which  is  to  be  our  halting  place  for  the  night.     The 
mode  used  in  navigating  the  Chagres,  is  poling,  a 
most  laborious  as  well  as  slow  proceeding,  but  I  suppose it  must  be  the  only  feasible  plan,  as  surely,  were 
another  method  practicable,  it  would  have  been  tried 
before  now.     Notwithstanding  this  disadvantage,  it 
must  be  owned  that  the  scenery,  and  all  surrounding 
the  banks  of  the  river  Chagres,  is  so  wonderful  and 
so  interesting  in  its  own  peculiar  style,  that  were  the 
discomforts  and  drawbacks  ten  times  worse  than  they 
actually  are,  I  think  the  voyage  well  worth  the  experiment. The  sun  I  must  own  was  almost  overpowering :  it  is  a  wonder  we  did  not  get  a  stroke, 
being  exposed  to  five  hours'  unceasing  blaze.  I  never 
before  to-day  completely  realised  "  the  deep  silence 
of  a  noontide  forest."  *  Far  as  the  eye  could  reach 
over  hill  and  over  plain,  before  and  around,  spread 
the  undulating  but  unbroken  surface  of  the  tropical 
woods,  looking  like  some  vast  petrified  ocean  (I  was 
going  to  say  frozen,  but  the  idea  of  ice  in  such  a 
scene  would  be  too  "  far  fetched  ").  Then  the  stillness, not  a  breath,  not  a  sound  was  heard,  save  what 
was  caused  by  ourselves,  and  that  was  but  little,  for 
it  was  too  hot  to  talk  or  to  move  unnecessarily, 
therefore  the  only  actual  token  of  life  was  the  measured plashing  of  the  pole  in  the  water  drawing  us 
slowly  along.  We  had  proceeded  thus  for  a  couple 
of  hours  when  we  experienced  an  interruption  of  a 
very  curious  nature,  and  which,  owing  to  the  incongruity it  presented  to  all  that  had  gone  before,  will 
not  be  speedily  forgotten.  Our  boat  suddenly  stopped at  the  entrance  to  a  little  creek,  when  there  appeared by  the  river  side  —  a  woman!  with  a  child  of 
between  four  and  five  years  old.  One  would  have 
imagined  she  had  dropped  from  the  skies,  did  the 
inhabitants  of  the  celestial  regions  dress  in  the  style 
of  this  lady ;  but  where  on  the  surface  of  the  earth 
she  did  come  from,  was  certainly  neither  to  be  seen 
nor  conceived.  She  wore  a  pale  yellow  dress  of  crape 
gauze,  or  some  equally  light  material,  with  several 
blonde  flounces  of  most  elaborately  designed  patterns, 
Over  her  shoulders  was  thrown  a  shawl,  bright  blue 
in  colour,  and  also  of  some  light  material,  while 
neck,  arms,  and  head  shone  resplendent  with  jewels 
(chiefly  diamonds)  and  flowers.  To  complete  the 
picture,  she  held  in  her  hands  some  articles  of  furniture generally  supposed  to  belong  rather  to  the 
bedroom  than  the  public  conveyance.  I  wish  the 
climate  had  been  cooler.  I  should  have  so  much 
liked  to  enter  into  conversation  with  her  ;  but  it  was 
too  hot,  and  as  she  did  not  utter  a  word,  I  feared 
that  even  if  I  tried  Spanish,  I  should  not  be  successful as  the  patois  are  many  and  various.  We 
found  ourselves  equally  lethargic  when,  a  little  later, 
the  boatmen  darted  quickly  across  the  river  in  pursuit of  an  unhappy  iguano,  which  they  espied  basking 
in  the  sun.  Having  caught  the  poor  victim,  they 
tied  him  up,  fastening  the  claws  behind  the  back,  and 
so  carried  him  in  triumph,  preparatory  to  cooking 
and  eating  him.  In  point  of  size,  the  iguano  seems 
to  be  midway  between  a  large  lizard  and  a  small 
alligator.  The  flesh  is  considered  in  these  parts  a 
table  delicacy.  At  length  we  reached  our  haven, 
Cruces,  a  villanous  looking  little  place.  On  disembarking, we  walked  through  the  village,  a  collection 
of  tumble  down  log  huts,  till  we  arrived  at  our  sleeping quarters,  the  huts  so  called.  Here  I  cannot  say 
we  slept,  but  we  passed  the  night.  Besides  the 
agreeable  sight  of  monstrous  spiders,  innumerable 
in  quantity,  attached  to  the  walls  and  ceiling  of  our 
rooms,  scorpions  were  more  than  suspected ;  and  to 
crown  all,  we  were  gratified  by  hearing  a  mysterious 
hissing  during  the  whole  night,  which  the  next 
morning  we  were  informed  was  produced  by  snakes. 
A  pleasant  and  enj oy able  residence  certainly!  Among 
other  discomforts  we  were  starved ;  there  was  absolutely nothing  to  eat ;  no  bread,  no  fresh  meat,  only 
some  dried  beef,  which  was  totally  unmanageable, 
and  there  was  not  even  chocolate ;  but  by  way  of 
compensation,  there  was  any  quantity  of  claret  and 
brandy :  so,  although  we  were  faint  from  want  of  food, 
we  were  obliged  to  bear  the  deprivation  as  best  we 
could,  and  at  ten  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  30th 
we  mounted  our  mules  to  accomplish  the  rest  of  the 
Isthmus  passage,  a  distance  of  about  twenty-one 
miles.  From  the  different  accounts  I  had  heard 
and  read  of  the  perils  and  dangers  of  the  road,  I  had 
gone  fully  prepared  for  no  end  of  catastrophes  and 
adventures  of  all  kinds,  and  consequently  I  was 
really  half  disappointed  to  find  so  little  need  for  all 
rny  powers  of  endurance.  To  begin  with  the  road  : 
there  was  scarcely  a  single  spot  on  our  path  to-day  that 
I  would  not  have  ridden  even  a  good  English  horse 
over ;  and  with  our  little  Mexican  steeds  we  should 
easily  have  gone  over  the  ground  in  less  than  half 
the  time  it  took  us  toiling  and  jogging  on  these 
indolent  mules.  There  must,  however,  be  some 
wonderful  difference  caused  by  even  a  day's  rain. 
We,  with  our  usual  good  fortune  in  the  way  of 
weather,  have  had  nothing  but  i(  plenty  too  much '" 
sunshine  all  the  way.  And  it  seems  impossible  that 
every  one  should  concur  in  describing  the  difficulties 
of  the  passage  as  so  great,  were  there  not  some 
grounds  for  apprehension.  I  remember,  too,  Lord 
S.  (whose  correct  and  graphic  account  of  the  rest  of 
the  trip  has  been  most  invaluable  to  me)  mentions 
that,  at  nearly  every  step,  his  mule  got  up  to  its  neck 
in  a  bog  or  quagmire  of  some  sort.  Certainly  a  very 
different  state  of  things  to  what  we  experienced, 
everything  being  dry,  parched,  and  burning.  After 
about  eight  hours'  slow  progress,  we  at  length  gained 
the  summit  of  a  hill,  from  whence  the  broad  Pacific, 
the  islands,  and  the  beautiful  bay  and  town  of  Panama 
burst  upon  our  sight.  It  would  be  hard  to  find  a 
more  lovely  view  as  it  "  shone  in  the  light  of  declining day." 

3lst,  Panama. — Our  ideas  of  rest  and  peace,  if 
we  had  any,  were  but  rudely  dispelled  on  arriving 
here.  We  had  been  a  little  prepared  during  our 
passage  of  the  Isthmus,  by  encountering  from  time 
to  time  some  parties  of  frightfully  uncouth  and 
savage-looking  people  (who  all  asked  us  an  infinite 
number  of  questions),  for  a  certain  amount  of  annoyance and  discomfort  on  a  nearer  acquaintance  with 
the  Californians.  But,  alas  !  the  reality  far  surpassed 
our  imaginations.  We  had  the  ill  luck  to  fall  into 
the  cross  tide  of  gold  diggers  to  the  number  of  upwards of  1600  savages  just  landed  simultaneously  on 
either  side  of  the  Isthmus.  No  tongue  and  no  pen 
could  do  them  justice ;  their  appearance  was  scarcely 
human,  and  as  to  their  manners,  I  must  renounce  all 
attempts  to  give  an  account  of  them.  One  small 
item  I  shall  note  down  as  being  the  first  specimen. 
On  leaving  my  bed-room  at  the  hotel,  and  coming 
into  the  public  (called  par  excellence  the  ladies') 
saloon.  I  found  tables,  sofas,  and  floor  covered  with 
bones,  fat,  and  sundry  other  remains  of  food,  which 
the  savages,  whose  shouts  and  whooping  had  been  disturbing me  for  two  hours  previously,  had  been  devouring without  other  implements  than  those  already provided  by  nature,  namely  tooth  and  nail. 
Fortunately  I  had  a  letter  of  introduction  to  Mr.  and 
Madame  Hurtado  (the  latter  is  the  daughter  of  Mr. 
Perry,  our  consul  here),  and,  thanks  to  their  kindness 
and  hospitality,  we  are  enabled  to  avoid  the  annoyances  of  this  hotel  during  the  day,  as  we  are  invited 
to  take  our  meals  and  spend  the  day  with  them,  as 
long  as  we  remain  at  Panama.  But  the  nights  are 
unendurable;  no  sleep,  no  peace.  Moreover,  the 
charges  are  positively  ridiculous.  For  one  wretched 
little  room  containing  a  bed  and  a  half,  the  half 
being  a  bed  without  a  mosquito  net,  which  constitutes by  far  the  most  important  moiety  in  these 
parts,  one  cracked  water  jug  and  basin,  and  one 
looking  glass,  they  demand  the  preposterous  sum  of 
five  dollars  a  night ;  food,  lights,  &c.,  extra. 

February  1st.  —  This  morning  we  visited  the 
cathedral,  almost  the  only  building  worthy  of  notice 
in  the  town  which  is  not  gone  to  decay.  It  is  a  fine 
old  edifice,  with  some  good  specimens  of  sculpture. 
There  are  many  other  ruined  churches,  convents,  and 
houses,  all  bearing  traces  of  much  past  grandeur  and 
magnificence.  But  the  great  charm  of  Panama  is 
the  scenery.  All  around,  the  bay,  the  sea,  the  sky, 
the  distant  mountains,  all  is  enchanting,  far  more 
like  the  Greek  islands  than  any  other  part  of  the 
world  I  have  seen  since  leaving  them. 

3rd. — We  find  that  the  steamer  for  the  south  does 
not  leave  here  until  the  7th  of  this  month,  consequently we  have  decided  on  going  to  the  island  of 
Taboga  for  the  time  yet  to  elapse,  so  we  shall  go 
there  to-morrow.  One  very  great  pleasure  I  have 
enjoyed  since  coming  here,  which  has  gone  far  to 
make  up  for  the  disagreeables  of  the  hotel.  Every 
night  in  walking  back  from  Mr.  Hurtado's,  I  have 
paused  to  gaze  on  the  Southern  Cross  shining  in  all 
its  splendour  above  us. 

4th,  Taboga.  —  On  board  the  E.  M.  S.  ship 
Bogota.  We  have  been  very  kindly  received  by 
Captain  Hall  the  commander  of  this  beautiful 
vessel,  and  allowed  to  take  up  our  quarters  on  board 
at  once,  instead  of  stopping  on  shore.  I  am  greatly 
pleased  with  this  island,  the  air  is  fresher  and  cooler 
than  at  Panama,  and  yet  we  have  the  beautiful  view 
of  the  bay  and  surrounding  country.  We  went  this 
afternoon  on  a  shilling  expedition  on  the  golden 
sands  of  Taboga ;  we  picked  up  some  beautiful  and 
rare  specimens.  The  Pacific  coast  is  very  famous  for 
its  conchological  (if  there  be  such  a  word)  productions. Not  very  far  distant  are  the  Pearl  Islands, 
whence  a  considerable  trade  is  obtained  from  the 
pearl  fishery.  At  Panama,  I  saw  several  very 
curiously  wrought  ornaments,  in  seed  pearl  and 
gold  filagree,  which  had  the  advantage  at  least  of 
being  very  uncommon;  also  the  famous  Panama 
chains  of  pure  unalloyed  gold,  flexible  as  a  blade  of 
grass. 

Qth. — The  Bogota  returned  to  Panama  to  receive 
the  mails  and  passengers ;  we  have  therefore  come  on 
shore  to  spend  the  day  with  the  Hurtados.  We  set 
out  on  our  travels  once  more  to  morrow.  As  I  do  not 
know  when  the  next  opportunity  of  sending  you  any 
tidings  will  be,  I  shall  post  this  now  here,  and  until 
we  arrive  at  Lima  will  write  a  journal  of  all  that 
occurs.  In  the  mean  time  I  am  ever  your  affectionate 

C.
