Panama,  February  7th,  6  r.M.  —  We  have  just 
quitted  the  harbour,  my  dear  Father,  on  our  southern 
voyage ;  weather  fine,  but  excessively  hot.  A  very 
disagreeable  incident  occurred  yesterday  evening  on 
board  this  vessel,  which  has  caused  me  great  vexation ;  a  morocco  travelling  case  of  mine,  which  I 
valued  highly,  not  on  account  of  its  own  worth,  but 
because  it  had  belonged  to  my  mother,  was  stolen 
from  my  cabin.  I  immediately  communicated  the 
intelligence  to  the  captain,  and  since  then  everything 
has  been  done  which  was  possible  to  discover  the 
thief  or  get  the  case  restored,  but  as  yet  without 
effect.  I  have  offered  a  reward  of  100  dollars,  and 
no  questions  asked,  if  it  is  returned  to  me ;  and  Captain Hall,  by  my  persuasion,  has  promised  pardon  to 
the  culprit  if  he  will  now  confess ;  or,  as  there  might 
be  a  feeling  of  shame  connected  with  his  comrades 
were  he  to  own  he  was  a  robber,  a  particular  spot  in 
the  ship  will  be  visited  twice  a  day,  and  if  the  case  is 
put  there  no  inquiries  will  be  made.  In  the  meantime  the  officers  of  the  ship  are  told  off-  in  different 
directions  to  search  the  berths  and  quarters  of  the 
crew. 

8th. — They  have  got  hold  of  a  man  who  acknowledges he  knows  something  of  my  lost  property,  but 
who  is  foolish  enough  to  be  obstinate,  and  refuse  any 
further  explanation.  As  he  bears  a  very  bad  character, and  is  strongly  suspected  to  be  himself  the 
thief,  Captain  Hall  has  given  him  till  midday  to 
confess  what  he  knows  or  has  done,  and  if  he  does 
not  before  that,  he  will  be  put  in  irons.  To  my  consternation the  foolish  man  has  proved  stubborn,  and 
consequently  the  threatened  punishment  has  been 
inflicted.  We  crossed  the  line  at  7  P.M.  this  evening. 
Heat  very  great,  though  perhaps  not  quite  so  violent 
as  I  expected.  The  days  are  gone  by  now  when 
crossing  the  line  was  an  event  celebrated  by  a  mimic 
visit  from  Neptune.  Now  the  fact  was  merely  stated, 
and  we  found  ourselves  sans  ceremonie  in  the 
southern  hemisphere. 

Wth. —  I  am  happy  to  say  that  the  prisoner  has 
made  a  confession,  and,  above  all,  that  my  case  is 
restored  safe  and  sound.  The  reason,  or  more  properly speaking  the  temptation,  which  he  alleged 
prompted  the  theft  he  has  now  disclosed.  I  had  been 
a  good  deal  puzzled  about  this  part  of  the  business,  as 
I  had  not  lost  anything  which  would  fetch  any  money 
to  speak  of ;  but  it  seems  that,  during  the  few  days 
we  had  spent  on  board  the  ship  at  Taboga,  my  proceedings had  been  watched,  and  by  this  means  the 
man  had  discovered  that  I  was  in  the  habit  of  keeping my  purse  and  a  small  box  containing  rings  (one 
of  which  was  a  diamond)  inside  the  stolen  case,  and 
these  were  the  objects  of  his  desire.  Very  fortunately 
for  me,  however,  he  had  not  observed  that  every 
evening,  on  going  to  dress  for  dinner  at  six  o'clock, 
I  put  the  rings  on  my  fingers  and  the  purse  in  my 
pocket,  the  latter  because  we  generally  played  at 
vingt-un  every  night  between  tea  and  bedtime ;  and 
from  not  having  noticed  this  he  abstracted  the  case 
at  eight  o'clock.  Had  he  taken  it  during  the  day, 
both  ornaments  and  money  would  then  have  gone,  I 
fear,  irretrievably.  As  it  was,  the  only  loss  I  have 
sustained  is  that  of  three  or  four  very  long  letters 
addressed  to  people  at  home,  and  which  were  all 
ready  sealed  and  prepared  for  departure,  and  these 
the  thief  very  wantonly  threw  into  the  sea  instead  of 
the  post.  Very  fortunately,  your  letter  escaped,  from 
my  having  written  it  while  on  shore.  But  "  all's  well 
that  ends  well,"  and  I  am  pleased  enough  to  have 
escaped  so  well.  The  next  thing  will  be  to  prevail 
on  Captain  Hall  to  pardon  and  set  free  the  delinquent, whose  stupidity  I  think  far  exceeds  his  criminality. The  idea  of  letting  himself  be  found  out, 
when,  according  to  the  bargain,  he  might  have 
restored  the  case  to  me  with  or  without  making  any 
explanation,  and,  unquestioned,  would  have  received 
100  dollars  !  Now  that  my  mind  is  easy  on  this 
subject  I  can  take  time  to  chronicle  an  incident 
which  took  place  on  the  morning  of  our  departure 
from  Panama,  and  which  might  have  rendered  it  a 
matter  of  indifference  whether  the  morocco  case  was 
found  or  not.  Much  against  my  inclination  and 
judgment,  I  was  persuaded  to  join  a  party  in  a  sailing- 
trip  along  the  coast  and  bay,  and  for  this  purpose  we 
embarked  in  a  small  cutter  under  the  command  of  a 
gentleman  whose  name  I  will  not  mention,  but  who 
confessed  he  had  never  been  in  anything  but  a  steamboat on  the  Pacific,  and  in  this  particular  Bay  of 
Panama  knew  nothing  of  the  currents,  swells,  or  any 
other  peculiarities  which  might  belong  to  it.  This 
was  not  the  most  agreeable  intelligence  we  could 
have  received  when  about  a  hundred  yards  from  the 
steamer.  With  the  rashness  and  foolhardiness  of 
ignorance,  however,  he  proceeded  to  crowd  every 
morsel  of  sail  he  could  get  hold  of  on  the  unlucky 
little  boat,  and,  worse  still,  had  fastened  the  principal 
sail  as  if  he  had  intended  to  show  off  an  experiment 
at  the  Polytechnic  with  manufactured  perils.  This 
feat  was  scarcely  accomplished  when  over  we  went. 
What  had  exactly  happened  I  know  not,  though  I 
can  form  a  tolerably  good  guess.  On  emerging  from 
a  most  unwelcome  dip  in  the  sea,  I  saw  a  man  with  a 
knife  in  his  hand  (he  was  a  sailor,  not  an  officer), 
having  cut  loose  the  sail,  my  companion  and  myself 
looking  like  drowned  rats,  the  "commander"  and 
another  gentleman  looking  very  foolish,  and  a  shark 
looking  very  much  disappointed.  So  after  this  the 
rest  of  the  party  agreed  with  me  it  would  be  better 
to  make  no  more  such  experiments,  and  to  be  contented with  rowing  quietly  back.  We  had  not  proceeded long  before  we  met  one  of  the  ship's  boats, 
which  the  chief  officer,  Mr.  Davies,  sent  off  to  our 
assistance,  having  seen  through  his  telescope  that 
something  was  wrong,  though  we  were  too  far  to 
enable  him  to  distinguish  the  precise  nature  of  the 
accident.  Now  to  return  to  the  present.  Before 
midnight  we  entered  the  Guayaquil  Eiver,  passing  on 
our  route  a  most  singular  island,  called  Dead  Man's 
Island,  from  the  extraordinary  resemblance  it  bears 
to  a  dead  person  when  laid  out  previous  to  burial. 

llth,  Guayaquil. — I  had  never  till  now  realised, 
as  the  Americans  would  say,  what  heat  was.  Something quite  indescribable,  and  with  it  all  the  rain  is 
pouring  in  sheets.  All  about  this  territory,  that  is, 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Ecuador  State,  it  very 
rarely  ceases  raining,  while  only  about  a  hundred 
miles  further  down  the  coast  it  never  rains  at  all.  We 
went  on  shore  and  dined  with  the  English  consul  and 
his  family  (Mr.  Cox),  having  previously  walked  about 
the  town  and  looked  at  the  shops,  which  are  not 
particularly  famous.  The.  celebrated  hats  called 
par  excellence  Panama,  are  all  manufactured  here. 
Guayaquil  is  also  very  celebrated  for  grass  hammocks, woven  with  all  sorts  of  pretty  colours.  I  procured one  of  these  as  a  souvenir.  I  must  not  forget 
to  notice  a  production  in  which  I  imagine  no  other 
place  in  the  world  could  vie  with  Guayaquil,  namely, 
mosquitoes.  I  shall  never  forget  the  martyrdom  I 
suffered  during  dinner ;  my  neck,  shoulders,  arms,  and 
feet  are  covered  with  stings .  as  if  I  had  the  measles. 
Owing  to  the  unfortunate  thickness  of  the  atmosphere we  could  not  distinguish  Chimborazo.  We 
saw  the  dim  outline  of  the  Andes,  however,  and  shall 
hope  to  have  better  fortune  another  day  with  Chimborazo, as  in  tolerably  clear  weather  it  is  always 
visible  from  Guayaquil.  En  revanche  for  not  seeing 
him,  we  enjoyed  some  ice  at  dinner  brought  that 
morning  from  his  snowy  peak. 

12th. — Took  our  departure  from  Guayaquil  very 
early  this  morning,  rain  pouring  in  torrents:  passed 
again  Dead  Man's  Island,  and  were  still  more  struck 
with  its  strange  form. 

13th. — Touched  at  Payta,  where,  as  the  steamer 
was  before  her  time,  we  remained  some  hours.  We 
went  on  shore,  and  paid  a  visit  to  the  consul,  Mr. 
Blacker.  This  is  a  most  deserted  looking  spot — nothing but  sand  hills,  and  a  few  houses,  sand  coloured, 
to  be  seen;  nevertheless,  it  is  I  believe  in  a  more 
nourishing  condition  than  it  looks.  From  the  appearance  of  the  sky,  the  inhabitants  were  rather 
anticipating  a  shower  of  rain  —  a  luxury  they  had 
not  enjoyed  for  nine  years  !  We  did  not  stay  long 
enough  to  know  whether  their  wishes  were  gratified 
or  not. 

14th.  —  At  sea  all  day.  Very  early  in  the  morning we  passed  the  Lobos  islands,  of  parliamentary 
and  guano  celebrity.  I  used  often,  when  skimming 
over  the  papers  at  home,  and  the  yarns  they  were 
spinning  about  Lobos,  to  wonder  where  on  earth  it 
was  —  little  expecting  I  should  so  soon  be  on  the 
spot. 

15th.  —  Called  at  a  small  place  called  Pacasmayo 
—  a  very  beautiful  bay  hemmed  in  by  hills  on  every 
side,  and  the  giant  mountains  in  the  distance.  Some 
of  our  fellow  passengers  went  on  shore,  and  brought 
back  with  them  some  most  magnificent  grapes ; 
bunches  which  would  have  gained  a  first  class  prize 
at  the  horticultural  exhibitions. 

16th. —  Touched  at  Gruacho,  another  of  the  numerous ports  on  the  Pacific,  and  finally,  about  one  o'clock 
P.M.,  anchored  in  the  Bay  of  Callao,  a  busy  looking 
place  —  flags  of  all  nations,  and  vessels  of  all  kinds ; 
but  the  sky  was  dim  and  hazy.  It  is  strange  that, 
although  it  never  rains  in  this  land  of  the  children 
of  the  sun,  the  sky  is  by  no  means  generally  clear ; 
and  I  am  told  that  the  bright  and  cloudless  blue,  so 
often  found  in  other  parts  of  the  two  Americas,  is 
here  a  great  rarity.  We  landed  at  half  past  five  P.M. 
at  the  railway  station,  which,  like  that  at  Navy  Bay, 
is  built  at  the  water's  edge.  To  make  up  for  the 
thickness  of  the  atmosphere  when  we  arrived,  there 
was  a  beautiful  sunset,  all  crimson  and  gold,  making 
even  the  sand  hills  and  white  rocks  about  Callao  look 
romantic.  Twenty  minutes'  drive  brought  us  to  the 
goal  of  our  long  journey,  to  Lima  —  the  City  of 
Kings.  As  we  were  accompanied  by  some  of  our 
shipboard  friends,  we  proceeded  on  foot  from  the 
railway  station  to  the  hotel.  The  station,  I  should 
mention,  was  formerly  an  old  convent,  now  tranmogrified into  a  more  worldly  establishment.  The 
first  impression  made  by  Lima,  in  the  little  we  have 
been  able  to  see  this  evening,  is,  that  it  bears  a 
strong  resemblance  to  Mexico.  After  walking  the 
length  of  a  handsome  street,  we  suddenly  emerged 
on  the  Plaza,  and  here  I  could  quite  have  fancied 
myself  back  in  the  Aztec  city.  The  cathedral  occupies one  entire  side  of  the  square,  as  it  does  in 
Mexico  —  but  the  other  three  sides  are  much  gayer 
here.  They  are  called  portales,  are  ranged  in 
arches,  and  something  like  the  Palais  Eoyal  in  point 
of  gay  shops  and  stalls,  with  all  their  wares  spread 
out  in  tempting  array,  and  brilliantly  lighted.  We 
have  housed  ourselves  at  Morin's  hotel  on  the  Plaza. 
The  other  hotel  which  was  most  recommended  is 
quite  full.  There  is  a  general  rush  from  Callao  and 
elsewhere  in  these  parts  to  hear  Catherine  Hayes, 
who  is  to  sing  for  the  last  time  here  to-night.  She 
is  en  route  to  California.  We  were  fortunately  able 
to  procure  a  box,  and  were  soon  gratified  by  hearing the  Barbiere,  Miss  Hayes  of  course  taking  the 
part  of  Rosina.  The  opera  house  is  pretty  enough  ; 
still  nothing  very  remarkable.  But  what  was 
singular,  was  the  almost  exclusive  British  audience, 
so  far  away  from  home !  There  are  many  merchants settled  here  or  in  Callao,  with  their  families  ; 
all  of  whom  I  imagine,  attended  on  this  occasion. 
Then  there  are  two  or  three  ships  belonging  to  our 
navy,  as  well  as  the  packet  service.  And  each  and 
all  of  these  furnished  a  quota  of  dilettanti,  eager  to 
greet  their  countrywoman. 

Having  now  safely  landed,  and  established  ourselves for  a  time  at  Lima,  I  shall  close  this  letter, 
and  hope  to  find  an  opportunity  of  sending  it  shortly. 
I  should  not  wonder  if  you  received  it  via  California, 
as  the  communication  is  much  more  frequent  that 
way  by  St.  Jean  de  Nicaragua,  than  direct  from  here 
to  England  by  Panama. 

Ever  your  affectionate, 
C. 