Lima,  Feb.  17  th.  —  My  dear  Father,— The  first  day 
of  arrival  at  a  resting  place,  however  short  that  rest 
is  to  be,  I  have  hitherto  observed,  is  always  passed 
in  doing  nothing.  To-day  has  formed  no  exception 
to  our  general  course.  After  dinner  we  took  a  stroll 
about  the  town,  looked  at  the  shops,  and  voila  tout. 
These  are  much  finer  than  at  Mexico ;  indeed,  they 
are  so  pretty  as  to  almost  deserve  the  modern  title 
given  to  Lima,  namely,  the  Paris  of  South  America, 
though  I  still  prefer  the  old  one,  Ciudad  de  los 
Keyes,  "The  City  of  Kings."  I  have  discovered 
another  great  resemblance  in  Lima  to  Valetta,  as 
well  as  Mexico.  The  Peruvian  and  Maltese  systems 
of  building  covered  balconies,  chiefly  of  glass,  outside every  house,  cause  a  striking  similarity  in  the 
appearance  of  the  two  cities.  The  churches  here 
are  beautiful ;  we  entered  one,  and  were  told  it  was 
"  La  Merced."  Some  very  rich  carving  round  several 
of  the  altars,  and  the  exterior  architecture  very  fine. 
18th. —  Walked  to  one  of  the  public  promenades 
this  evening,  called  the  Alameda  del  Aepo.  These 
Alamedas,  wherever  one  meets  them,  all  bear  a  strong 
family  likeness  one  to  another,  whether  at  Havana, 
Mexico,  Lima,  or  elsewhere:  the  same  broad  avenue 
for  carriages,  flanked  by  two  narrower  ones  for 
equestrians  and  foot  passengers ;  the  only  difference 
being  in  the  description  of  trees  with  which  they  are 
planted.  In  this  last  respect  Havana  must  literally 
bear  the  palm,  as  there  one  at  least  of  the  paseos  is 
formed  by  palm  trees,  those  fairest  of  the  fair  in  woodland scenery.  On  our  way  we  crossed  the  bridge 
over  the  Eimac,  the  river,  or  stream  which  waters 
the  city,  and  from  which  its  present  name  of  Lima  is 
said  to  have  been  derived,  or  rather  corrupted.  From 
this  bridge  ;  the  view  is,  or  should  be,  a  very  beautiful one ;  but  it  is  seldom  clear,  a  sad  drawback. 

19th.  —  Mr.  Went,  to  whom  I  had  brought  a 
letter  of  introduction,  sent  his  carriage,  and  we  took 
a  drive  to  the  Valley  of  Amancaes,  about  three  miles 
off.  The  same  dull  heavy  sky  above  us,  though  the 
air  was  mild  and  soft.  It  really  is  difficult  to  believe 
that  it  never  rains  here.  All  this  afternoon,  had  I 
been  anywhere  else,  I  should  have  pronounced  a 
drenching  shower  as  quite  inevitable.  Yet  not  a 
drop  came,  and  none  ever  falls :  that  point  all 
agree  in  nem.  con.  But  some  go  as  far  as  to  say 
the  sun  never  shines  :  this  must  be  a  little  exaggerated ;  indeed,  during  the  day,  we  have  had  a  good 
deal :  but  sunshine  without  a  cloud  would  be,  I  suppose, the  miracle.  I  only  wonder  how  the  ancient 
people  of  the  country  came  to  be  sun-worshippers, 
in  a  land  where  they  saw  him  so  little.  From  Amancaes  the  view  of  Lima  is  most  imposing.  Its  numberless domes  and  towers,  rising  from  the  Pacific, 
lying  peacefully  beyond,  reminds  me  of  Byron's 
lines,  speaking  of  Venice  :  — 

"  She  looks  a  sea  Cybele  fresh  from  ocean, 
Rising  with  her  tiara  of  proud  towers  ;" 

the  strip  of  land  intervening  between  Lima  and 
Callao  not  being  visible  at  this  distance,  and  consequently Lima  looks  as  if,  like  Venice,  she  rose 
from  the  waters.  The  valley  of  Amancaes  itself 
is  a  most  singular-looking  spot,  seemingly  the  bed 
of  an  extinct  volcano,  a  wild  sterile  sort  of  plateau, 
surrounded  by  rocks  and  hills  of  lava  of  every  sort 
of  grotesque  shape,  not  a  shrub  nor  a  blade  of  grass 
to  be  seen.  Then  the  deathlike  stillness  of  the  air 
was  something  awful ;  not  a  sound  to  be  heard.  I 
could  almost  have  fancied  myself  out  of  the  world, 
and  looking  upon  it.  They  say,  however,  that  once 
a  year,  in  the  month  of  June,  Amancaes  bears  a 
different  aspect.  On  or  about  the  festa  of  St.  John, 
namely  the  24th  of  June,  there  suddenly  spring 
up  in  this  desolate  spot  thousands,  millions  of  golden 
coloured  lilies!  This  savours  rather  of  the  marvellous,  but  still  they  say  it  is  true,  and  that  so 
suddenly  does  this  change  occur,  that  what  is  left 
over  night  a  parched  and  blackened  desert,  is  found 
in  the  morning  clothed  in  gold.  We  fancied  as  the 
sun  began  to  set  on  our  return  (by  the  bye,  he  just 
blazed  out  for  about  five  minutes,  in  time  to  allow 
him  to  make  a  decent  exit),  we  thought  we  could 
just  descry  the  peaks  of  the  Cordillera.  I  do  hope 
we  shall  have  one  good  view  of  them  before  leaving. 
20th. — Visited  some  of  the  churches,  accompanied 
by  Mr.  Pearson,  the  English  clergyman.  San 
Domingo  and  the  cathedral  are  both  handsome- 
looking  buildings,  but  unfortunately  there  is  not 
much  reality  in  either  of  them.  This,  however,  is 
inevitable,  as  they  dare  not  build  above  a  certain 
height  with  any  material  more  solid  than  reeds  and 
stucco,  the  earthquakes  are  so  frequent.  One  which 
occurred  here  about  three  weeks  ago  has  nearly 
shaken  off  the  cross  erected  on  one  of  the  domes 
of  the  cathedral,  and  it  now  stands  all  awry.  In 
one  of  the  side  chapels  of  this  last-named  edifice 
there  is  a  shrine  of  carved  cedar  wood,  the  most 
beautiful  specimen  of  workmanship  I  think  I  ever 
saw;  so  fine  and  delicate  that  at  first  I  imagined 
it  was  ivory:  indeed,  even  on  a  nearer  inspection, 
it  more  resembles  ivory,  the  wood  being  of  a  sort 
of  pale  cream  colour ;  and  this  was  carved  into 
wreaths,  garlands,  and  festoons  of  flowers,  intertwined  one  with  another  in  the  most  marvellous 
manner.  The  high  altar  and  some  few  other  parts 
of  the  church  are  still  decorated  with  silver  columns 
and  balustrades;  but,  like  everything  else  in  this 
part  of  the  world,  sadly  shorn  of  its  former  splendour, 
and  fast  hastening  to  decay.  Pizarro  is  said  to  be 
buried  under  the  altar  here.  Strange  that  doubt 
should  exist  on  such  a  subject,  and  I  must  own, 
even  against  my  favourite  Spaniards,  that  it  speaks 
badly  for  their  national  gratitude,  that  the  last 
resting-places  of  the  two  men  to  whom  they  owed 
the  discovery  of  North  and  South  America,  Christopher Columbus  and  Francesco  Pizarro,  should  be 
almost  unknown;  yet  where  their  tombs  are  most 
generally  supposed  to  be,  the  one  in  Havana 
and  the  other  here,  the  small  memorials  that  exist 
should  be  such  wretched  ones.  Here  there  is  more 
excuse,  as  they  have  renounced  their  allegiance 
to  Spain,  and  consequently  they  view  Pizarro's 
memory  with  no  friendly  feelings ;  but  at  Havana 
the  case  is  different,  and  to  Columbus  they  should 
erect  a  more  noble  monument. 

2lst. — Did  not  go  out ;  received  a  few  visits.  Lima 
is  suffering  much  at  this  time  from  an  epidemic 
they  call  peste,  and  nearly  every  house  has  some 
sick  people  in  it,  rendering  everything  very  triste, 
and  the  few  who  are  well  have  all  gone  to  Chorillas, 
a  little  bathing  place  a  couple  of  leagues  from  the 
town.  This  peste  appears  to  be  a  mild  sort 
of  yellow  fever,  and  has  never  appeared  before  in 
Lima,  which  is  generally  reputed  to  be  a  most 
healthy  part  of  the  world,  and  certainly  has  a  most 
delightful  climate,  at  least  to  my  taste.  The  air  is 
warm  without  burning,  and  very  soft. 

22nd. — I  have  for  the  last  two  days  been  making 
what  I  fear  will  turn  out  fruitless  efforts  to  accomplish an  expedition  to  Pachocamac,  to  see  the  ruins 
of  one  of  the  great  temples  of  the  sun.  The  distance 
is  but  twenty-one  miles,  yet  such  is  the  indolence 
of  the  people,  that  if  it  were  one  hundred,  they 
could  not  make  more  difficulties;  to  begin  with, 
they  maintain  that  not  less  than  three  days  are 
necessary  for  the  excursion,  which  really  seems  quite 
ridiculous  for  so  short  a  distance.  'However,  it  is 
no  use  contending  any  more,  and  so  we  must  put 
up  with  riding  out  to-morrow  and  seeing  some  lesser 
ruins  which  are  more  come-at-able.  We  are  fortunate 
enough  to  be  given  a  passage  down  to  Panama  in 
the  Virago,  through  the  good-nature  of  Captain 
Marshall  her  commander.  The  advantages  are  many 
in  this  arrangement.  First,  the  Virago  does  not 
leave  till  Saturday,  a  day  later  than  the  mail  steamer, 
thus  giving  us  a  little  more  time  to  spend  here; 
then  we  shall  avoid  the  numerous  little  ports  along 
the  coast,  which  we  have  already  sufficiently  visited ; 
and  lastly,  we  hope  to  go  into  the  Bay  of  San  Miguel, 
the  starting  point  of  the  Darien  passage,  and  projected canal,  and  this  vessel  contains  the  members 
of  the  far-famed  Darien  expedition. 

23rd. — Visited  the  church  of  San  Pedro  this  morning, which,  though  the  last,  is  the  handsomest  we 
have  yet  seen  ;  the  wood  carvings  in  the  side  chapels 
are  exquisite,  and  there  are  also  some  very  tolerable 
pictures.  We  had  previously  gone  to  the  museum, 
but  it  is  a  very  poor  affair,  the  only  objects  of  any 
interest  being  a  collection  of  the  portraits  of  the 
Incas,  from  the  two  first  children  of  the  sun,  Manco 
Capac  and  his  wife,  down  to  poor  Atahualpa.  It  is 
of  course  to  be  conjectured  that  the  artists  have 
drawn  chiefly  on  their  imaginations,  as  it  must  be 
very  doubtful  that  the  Incas  ever  sat  for  their 
pictures.  There  are  also  a  series  of  paintings  representing the  Spanish  viceroys,  beginning  with 
Pizarro.  Besides  the  portraits,  I  should  mention 
three  or  four  frightful  looking  mummies  which  are 
said  to  be  the  actual  remains  of  some  of  the  Incas  of 
Peru,  but  the  museum  can  boast  of  nothing  more. 
I  am  rejoiced  to  say  that  we  had  this  afternoon  a 
superb  view  of  the  Andes  in  all  their  majesty  and 
brightness.  We  stood  on  the  Eimac  bridge,  and 
clearly  traced  the  long  outline  of  snowy  peaks ;  so 
that  hitherto  unsatisfied  desire  is  now  accomplished, 
and  off  my  mind.  Passed  the  evening  at  the  house 
of  a  lady  to  whom  I  was  introduced  by  a  mutual 
friend,  and  who  is  universally  talked  of  as  "Mrs. 
Smith  of  Lima."  I  suppose  it  must  be  from  her 
generous  and  universal  hospitality;  but  to  visit  the 
"  City  of  Kings  "  and  not  know  Mrs.  Smith,  "  would 
argue  yourself  unknown,"  besides  being  a  serious  personal privation.  She  has  a  charming  house  filled  with 
curiosities  and  rarities  of  all  descriptions ;  but  above 
all  she  possesses  the  most  astonishing  and  varied 
collection  of  extraordinary  plants  and  flowers.  She 
very  good-naturedly  gave  me  some  rare  specimens 
of  both  flowers  and  leaves  to  preserve.  The  most 
singular  flower  in  her  possession  is  one  named  "  El 
Espiritu  Santo"  (the  Holy  Spirit),  of  the  Orchid 
species.  It  is  pure  white,  and  in  form  nearly  the 
exact  counterpart  of  a  dove.  I  am  told  the  plant 
is  exceedingly  rare,  not  above  two  or  three  specimens 
being  in  existence.  At  Mrs.  Smith's  house  also  was 
the  celebrated  Madame  Ida  Pfeiffer,  the  female  traveller, a  quiet  mannered  and  still  more  quiet  featured 
little  person.  Physiognomy  is  decidedly  at  fault 
sometimes.  No  one  would  guess,  to  look  at  this 
lady's  impassive  and  rather  expressionless  countenance, 
that  she  either  had  braved  or  was  likely  to  brave 
the  dangers  many  and  great  of  which  she  gives  so 
graphic  an  account  in  her  (f  Voyage  round  the 
World."  She  is  now  about  to  undertake  a  journey 
in  search  of  the  source  of  the  Amazon.  The  various 
governments  whose  territories  she  explores,  it  must
be  stated  to  their  credit,  give  her  every  assistance 
that  lies  in  their  power,  though  that  is  often  unavailing with  some  of  their  savage  subjects.  Madame 
PfeifTer  has  a  son  living  at  Munich,  a  doctor  by 
profession,  and  a  great  amateur  of  botany  and 

mineralogy.     Mrs.  S tells  me  that,  repeatedly, 

on  being  offered  various  substantial  recompenses 
for  the  benefits  she  has  conferred  by  her  useful 
discoveries  and  explorations,  Madame  Pfeiffer  has 
refused  any  other  guerdon  than  a  plant  or  some  old 
stones  for  the  purpose  of  enriching  the  museum  of 
her  beloved  son.  We  tasted  this  evening  a  liqueur 
called (( Italia,"  made  in  Peru  from  a  grape  originally 
brought  from  Italy ;  hence  the  name.  Notwithstanding which,  the  taste  is  most  decidedly  whiskey-ish. 
Barley  must,  I  am  sure,  be  partly  used  with  the 
grape  in  its  manufacture. 

23rd. — Employed  this  morning  in  shopping.  The 
ancient  palace  of  Pizarro  is  now,  alas!  converted 
into  a  Parisian  looking  "Passage,"  called  by  the 
modern  Peruvians  "  Portales."  Here  vendors  of 
of  ponchos,  gold  and  silver  filigree  work,  sweetmeats, and  other  luxuries  do  congregate.  The 
ponchos  are  generally  handsome ;  they  are  made 
of  the  Vicuna  wool,  soft  to  the  touch  and  brilliant 
in  hue,  but  not  equal  in  my  opinion  to  the  Mexican 
"  serape."  At  4  p.  M.  we  mounted  our  horses.  Took 
a  circuitous  kind  of  ride  for  the  purpose  of  exploring 
several  ruins;  these  mostly  appear  to  have  been 
temples  to  their  divinity,  or  fortresses,  each  group 
of  buildings  being  more  or  less  surrounded  by  walls 
of  the  Cyclopean  order.  The  great  charm  attaching 
to  ruins  in  the  old  world,  the  Greek  or  the  Eoman  for 
instance,  is  wanting  here,  I  mean  the  broken  column 
or  "noble  arch  in  proud  decay."  The  constant 
dread  of  earthquakes  causes  everything  intended  to 
last  to  be  built  low  and  with  a  view  to  durability 
and  solidity  rather  than  beauty.  One  of  our  party 
to-day  who  has  seen  both,  gives  us  the  consolatory 
assurance  that  the  ruins  of  the  temple  of  the  sun 
at  Pachacamac  are  neither  more  extensive  nor  in 
better  preservation  than  these. 

24th.  —  Mounted  again  early  this  morning,  on  an 
excursion  to  Chorillos,  about  nine  miles  distant. 
This  is  the  fashionable  bathing  place  of  Lima ;  and 
whither  at  the  present  moment  all  the  inhabitants  of 
the  city  have  flocked,  in  order  to  be  out  of  the  way 
of  the  peste,  and  to  enjoy  the  air,  which  is  said  to  be 
purer  and  also  cooler  than  at  Lima.  This  last  advantage may  be  the  case,  but  it  does  not  look  so ; 
indeed  I  never  saw  so  apparently  hot  a  looking 
place.  A  collection  of  huts  all  white,  the  rocks 
white,  the  ground  under  foot  white,  and  the  sea  a 
burning  blue.  However,  we  spent  the  morning  here, 
and  saw  the  process  of  bathing.  The  people  of 
both  sexes  go  into  the  water  together  equipped  in  a 
kind  of  bloomer  costume.  The  dressing  rooms  are 
singularly  constructed.  A  number  of  them  stand  on 
the  beach,  and  really  resemble  a  miniature  town. 
They  are  built  of  reeds,  and  are  grouped  in  clusters, 
forming  a  complete  labyrinth.  Each  little  cell  is 
provided  with  the  requisite  linen,  and  articles  necessary to  the  toilette.  In  returning,  we  varied  our 
route,  passing  through  Miraflores,  another,  but  inland 
watering  place;  this,  however,  is  green  and  fresh 
looking,  and  I  should  think  a  much  pleasanter  and 
cooler  summer  residence  than  Chorillos.  Since  we 
have  been  at  Lima,  we  have  had  daily  at  our  dinner 
table  the  most  delicious  potatoes.  The  potato,  if  I 
remember  rightly,  is  by  origin  a  native  of  Peru.  I 
have  never  anywhere  met  with  any  approaching 
these  in  flavour.  It  shows  that  cultivation  does  not 
always  improve,  though  as  in  this  case,  it  may  enlarge. 
'The  Peruvian  potatoes  are  small,  not  much  exceeding a  walnut  in  size,  and  of  a  bright  yellow  colour  — 
very  meally,  and,  as  I  have  said,  most  excellent. 
They  are  served  up  as  the  centre  dish  of  the  table, 
ranged  in  a  pyramid  shape. 

25th.  —  Bade  farewell  to  Lima  at  seven  o'clock 
this  morning,  taking  the  early  train  to  Callao,  where 
we  found  a  boat  from  the  Virago  awaiting  us,  in 
which  we  immediately  embarked,  and  in  a  few 
minutes  were  alongside  of  the  pretty  little  steamer. 
Captain  Marshall  had  invited  the  commander  of  the 
Trincomalee,  Captain  Houston,,  to  join  us  at  breakfast before  we  sailed.  Callao  *  was  looking  far  gayer, 
and  in  all  respects  more  attractive,  than  on  the  day 
of  our  arrival.  This  is  somebody's  birthday,  too,  so 
the  ships  are  dressed  in  all  their  gay  colours.  About 
ten  o'clock  the  signal  was  given,  and  we  were  "  off, 
off  and  away."  Finding  myself  again  on  board  a  man 
of  war,  recalls  to  my  mind  the  cruises  in  the  Bay  of 
Naples  which  I  took  some  years  back,  when  the 
English  and  French  fleets  had  gone  there  to  bully 
poor  King  Bomba.  Thfe  Virago  is  a  pretty  neat 
little  vessel,  carrying  six  guns.  She  bears  as  her 
motto  on  a  conspicuous  part  of  her  (but  not  being 
clever  at  nautical  terms,  I  won't  attempt  to  say 
which),  the  words  "England,  Home,  and  Beauty." 
There  was  some  imitation  of  the  ceremonies  and 
pranks  which  used  of  yore  to  inaugurate  crossing  the 
line,  on  the  day  when  this  imaginary  boundary 
was  passed.  It  was  made  a  sort  of  holiday  on  board 
the  ship,  and  several  of  the  sailors  enacted  a  sort  of 
masque  or  play,  dressing  themselves  up  as  Neptune 
and  his  satellites,  marine  monsters,  and  a  few  terrestrial donkeys  closed  the  procession,  which  paraded 
the  decks  for  a  considerable  time,  and  saluted  the 
captain  and  officers. 
March  5th. — Anchored  once  more  at  Panama, 
after  a  week's   steaming  from  Callao  —  a  pleasant 
voyage,  delightful  companions,  in  short,  every  thing 
couleur  de  rose.     On  our   way,  we   lay   for   a  few 
hours  off  Guayaquil,  near  the  Dead  Man's   Island. 
I  have  now  heard  another  version  of  the  derivation 
of  this  name,  which  is  in  Spanish,  "  El  Enamuertajado ; "  namely,  that  some  years  ago  there  was  an 
intention  of  building  a  lighthouse  on  the  island  to 
guide  vessels  in  their  course  when  near  the  mouth 
of  the  river.     Four  men  were  accordingly  sent,  with 
requisite  building  materials,  and  food  to  support  them 
for  six  months,  by  which  time  the  task  was  to  be 
finished.     In  the  meanwhile  there  occurred  a  "  Pronunciamento,"  or  revolution,  or  at  any  rate  a  change 
of  government  in  the  Ecuador  State.     Frequent  as 
these  events  are,  one  might  suppose  that  the  general 
business  of  life  would  be  carried  on   in  tile  usual 
manner  ;  but  if  this  tale  be  true,  it  would  seem  that 
the  disturbance  in  question  had  obliterated  the  recollection of  what  had  passed  before.     Time  fled:  the 
six  months  elapsed,  and  no  one  thought  of  the  poor 
builders.     At  length  a  strange  vessel  on  her  way  up 
or  down  the  Pacific,  descried  a  signal  flying  on  the 
barren  isle.     She  bore  down  upon  it,  and  arrived  in 
time  to  hear  the  tale  of  misery  from  one  survivor 
out  of  the  four.     The  rest  had  died  starved  to  death, 
and  this,  the  fourth,  barely  lived  to  complete  his 
history,  but  sunk  under  the  accumulated  hunger  and 
exhaustion  he  had  undergone.  I  cannot  help  hoping, 
however,  that  all  this  is  a  mere  legend  of  romance  ; 
and  I  am  the  more  inclined  to  take  this  view  of  the 
story,  that  the  shape  and  outline  of  the  land  is  so 
unmistakably  like  a  corpse  enveloped  in  a  shroud, 
that  it  would  seem  amply  sufficient  to  account  for  the 
lugubrious  name.  I  had  an  opportunity  of  observing 
on  this  occasion,  what,  owing  to  our  having  landed 
so  immediately  on  our  previous  visit  to  Guayaquil, 
had  then  escaped  me,  viz.  the  curious  water  conveyance employed  by  the  natives  on  this  part  of 
the  Pacific  coast,  called  "  balsas."  It  is  a  strong- 
sort  of  raft,  lashed  securely  together,  and  carries  a 
sail  when  required.  Au  reste  these  balsas  answer 
the  purpose  of  house,  carriage,  a  kitchen,  parlour,  and 
all."  We  were  a  good  deal  amused,  while  awaiting  the 
time  of  our  departure,  in  watching  their  manoeuvres. 
Several  came  round  us,  the  occupiers  trying  to  dispose 
of  their  various  wares,  which  included  ponchos,  straw 
hats,  monkeys,  parrots,  grass  hammocks,  fruit,  and 
flowers.  I  have  been  watching  the  concoction  of  a 
shocking  dose  which  the  doctor  is  preparing  for  our 
benefit  in  crossing  the  isthmus,  which  is  at  present 
much  infected  with  "the  fever"  so  called,  and  which,  if 
it  once  gets  hold  of  you,  they  say  it  is  rarely,  if  ever, 
to  be  shaken  off.  Dr.  T.'s  nostrum  is  a  bottle  of  sherry, 
in  which  he  has  infused  such  a  quantity  of  quinine, 
that  it  will  demand  a  great  deal  of  courage,  both 
moral  and  physical,  to  take  his  prescribed  quantity, 
which  is  a  wine  glassful  every  five  miles.  This  is 
the  native  country  of  quinine,  consequently  it  is  procured here  in  alJ  its  strength  and  freshness.  We 
have  just  heard  that,  to  crown  our  good  fortune,  we 
beat  the  great  mail  steamer  Sant  Jago  by  three  hours, 
though  she  had  twelve  hours  start  of  us. 

6th. —  Landed  this  morning,  and  to  our  great 
regret,  were  obliged  to  say  good-bye  to  Captain  Marshall almost  immediately,  as  he  found  it  necessary 
to  proceed  to  Darien  (San  Miguel)  in  the  afternoon, 
to  render  assistance  if  need  be,  to  the  exploring 
party,  from  whom  the  last  intelligence  is  very  unsatisfactory. The  Indians  are  evidently  determined 
to  resist  to  the  death  any  attempt  to  penetrate  into 
their  territories.  They  have  already  resorted  to  the 
old  savage  expedient  of  shooting  poisoned  arrows 
from  ambuscade.  Having  taken  leave  of  Captain  M. 
and  the  Virago's  officers,  we  proceeded  to  Mr.  Hurtado's,  where  we  found  a  little  daughter  had  been 
born  since  our  last  visit.  We  were  also  equally 
surprised  to  find  Captain  Parker  awaiting  us,  he 
having  crossed  the  isthmus  in  order  to  escort  us 
back.  I  will  now  conclude  this  letter,  having  ended 
our  pleasant  Peruvian  journey,  and  safely  passed  all 
perils  in  the  Pacific.  We  must  hope  for  equally 
good  luck,  during  the  remainder  of  our  travel  on  the 
Atlantic.  Your  ever  affectionate, 

C. 