Off  Navy  Bay,  on  board  the  Dee,  March  1th.  —  My 
dear  Father,  —  This  morning  early  we  took  our  last 
look  at  the  beautiful  Bay  of  Panama,  which  appeared 
lovelier  than  ever  in  the  beams  of  the  rising  sun. 
Our  ride  this  time  was,  if  possible,  even  hotter  than 
when  we  traversed  the  same  ground  a  month  ago ; 
but  the  beauty  of  the  forest  scenery  and  luxuriance 
of  vegetation  is  still  the  same,  and  yet  still  new.  The 
railway  being  now  completed  as  far  as  a  little  Indian 
village  called  Rio  Obispo,  we  Were,  by  rather  hastening 
our  mules  and  considerably  heating  ourselves,  enabled 
to  perform  the  passage  across  in  one  day.  We  arrived 
at  Ri6  at  half-past  one  P.M.,  having  had  a  quick 
broiling  ride  from  Panama.  I  was  partly  amused 
and  partly  shocked  at  the  necessity  of  letting  my 
Guayaquil  parrot  be  carried  on  the  back  of  a  negro 
all  this  distance.  The  ground  was  absolutely  scorching to  the  touch,  yet  the  black  bearer  had  bare  feet. 
He  however  did  not  seem  to  mind  this,  and  trudged 
on  apparently  contented.  Not  so  poor  "Lorita." 
I  am  sorry  to  say  she  completely  lost  her  temper  and 
every  time  her  carrier  hitched  her  cage  up  or  down, 
or  otherwise  deranged  her  equilibrium,  she  began  to 
swear  most  lustily  all  the  bad  words  her  Spanish 
educational  repertoire  could  furnish  her.     Luckily 
there  will  be  few  in  England  likely  to  understand  her 
if    she   should    commit   any   similar   misdemeanors 
there,  as  besides  her  bad  language  being  Spanish,  it 
is  provincial,  and  has  a  great  deal  of  dialect  incomprehensible to  the  world  in  general.     We  left  Bio  by 
the  train,  and  in  three  hours  more  we  were  once 
again  on  board  the  Dee,  where  it  was  really  pleasant 
to  find  ourselves  so  heartily  welcomed,  and  to  see  the 
happy  faces  of  the  white  people,  and  the  grinning  ones 
of  the  blacks,  as  they  all  came  crowding  round  us  on 
our  arrival. 

8th. — Early  this  morning  the  "  Bonnie  Dee  "  took 
a  run  down  to  Chagres,  a  little  bit  of  extra  travel  for 
which  I  am  by  no  means  sorry,  as  it  affords  me  an 
opportunity  of  seeing  a  place  now  but  rarely  visited. 
Chagres  was  formerly  the  starting-point  for  the  people 
bound  across  the  isthmus ;  they  here  embarked  in  the 
little  canoes  and  generally  spent  three  or  four  days 
tedious  poling  up  the  river.  Now  of  course  the 
Navy  Bay  railroad  has  usurped  all  other  modes  of 
transit.  I  have  seldom,  however,  been  more  pleased 
with  the  appearance  of  a  place  than  I  was  with  this, 
partly  I  suppose  from  the  surprise.  I  had  generally
 figured  Chagres  to  myself  as  a  parched,  sandy,  unhealthy, and  perfectly  flat  part  of  the  world ;  instead 
of  which  I  found  something  as  nearly  as  possible  the 
exact  reverse  of  all  this.     We  landed  from  a  beautiful little  bay,  quite  land  locked;  and  so  calm  and 
still  was  everything  around  that  we  could  almost  have 
fancied  ourselves  the  first  discoverers  of  the  soil.     A 
short  walk  however  brought  us  to  the  town,  so  called, 
of  Chagres.     This  consists  merely  of  a  few  Indian 
huts,  the  few  establishments  that  once  existed  for  the 
temporary  accommodation  of  travellers  being  now 
either  closed  or  entirely  demolished,  and  the  rest  have 
returned   to   their   primitive   simplicity.     We   next 
ascended  the  heights  and  visited  the  remains  of  the 
old  castle  of  Chagres,  once  a  great  stronghold  of  the 
Spaniards,  but  now  left  to  the  mercies  of  weather 
and  time ;  a  sad  pity.   There  are  some  splendid  guns, 
most  elaborately  carved  and  ornamented,  but  all  deserted and  left  to  their  fate  ;  also  a  cellar  containing 
no  end  of  barrels  of  gunpowder,  but  all  so  damp  that 
a  bonfire  would  fail  to  ignite  them.     The  view  from 
every  side  was  most  beautiful,  and  we  left  it  much 
regretting   that   time   allowed   us   so  short  a  visit. 
Before   re-embarking  we  were  shown   another  and 
different  scene,  but  a  most  lovely  one,  a  green  valley 
and  a  forest  walk,  with  a  clear  bright  stream  rushing 
at  our  feet,  and,  above  all,  the  warm  blue  sky  and  that 
indescribable  stillness  in  the  air  so  peculiar  to  these 
tropical  climes,  So  farewell  to  Chagres.  And  now 
we  are  once  more  upon  the  waters.  We  returned  to 
Navy  Bay  to  take  up  the  mails,  and  then  finally  took 
our  departure. 

9th  and  Wth. — We  have  experienced  a  most  violent 
gale  of  wind  during  these  two  days ;  moreover,  it  has 
been  all  the  wrong  way,  or  what  sailors  call  right 
ahead.  We  were  much  rejoiced,  therefore,  to  find  ourselves this  morning,  the  llth,  in  the  long  creek,  and 
consequently  smooth  water,  leading  to  Cartagena,  at 
which  place  we  landed  about  eleven  o'clock.  Mr. 
Kortright,  remembering  that  we  had  not  been  able 
to  see  anything  of  the  place  on  our  former  visit,  had 
very  kindly  sent  his  carriage  to  meet  us,  and  although 
our  time  was  still  very  limited,  we  had  a  very  agreeable drive  all  about  the  environs  of  the  city.  We 
went  to  the  fort  of  the  Popa,  and  thus  had  an  opportunity of  examining  it  and  its  strange  shape  more 
nearly.  The  building  which  crowns  its  summit  is  a 
convent.  We  stopped  often,  to  gather  some  of  the 
beautiful  flowers  which  grow  in  wild  profusion  all 
around.  The  town  is  handsome,  and  besides  reminding me,  as  I  before  mentioned,  of  Venice  in  the 
distance,  the  narrow  streets  and  overhanging  roofs  of 
the  houses  on  a  nearer  view  recalled  Genoa  to  my 
recollection.  About  an  hour  ago  we  returned  and 
partook  of  luncheon  with  our  hospitable  host.  I  am 
writing  this  from  his  house,  so  that  it  will  bear  the 
Cartagena  post-mark.  The  time  is  drawing  near  now 
for  going  on  board  the  Dee  again,  and  to-night  we 
shall  take  our  last  look  at  South  America. 

Ever  your  affectionate, 

C. 