On  board  the  Conway,  off  Porto  Rico,  March 
18th. — My  dear  Father, —  Since  the  date  of  my  last 
letter  until  yesterday,  we  have  had  a  regular  succession of  gales,  almost  amounting'  to  hurricane ;  the 
first  really  bad  weather  (for  any  length  of  time  consecutively) that  we  have  suffered  since  our  arrival 
in  the  land  of  the  West.  We  reached  St.  Thomas 
yesterday  morning  at  eight  o'clock.  All  things  much 
the  same  there.  Having  transferred  ourselves  and 
our  effects  from  the  Dee  to  this  vessel,  we  had  about 
the  time  to  make  ourselves  comfortable  before  sailing. We  are  now  bound  on  our  last  island  trip, 
Jamaica  being  our  present  destination.  Early  this 
morning  we  anchored  in  the  harbour  of  Porto  Rico, 
or  I  should  more  correctly  say,  St.  Juan  de  Porto 
Rico,  that  being  the  name  of  the  seaport.  But  a 
great  disappointment  has  awaited  us  here.  We  are 
not  allowed  to  land,  vessels  coming  from  St. 
Thomas  being  in  quarantine,  although  the  cholera 
has  disappeared  from  there  now.  They  think  it 
better  to  be   on  the  safe  side.     We   are  therefore 
obliged  to  rest  contented  with  what  we  can  see  from 
the  ship  of  the  town   and   harbour,  which   bear  a 
most   striking  resemblance  to   Havana,   only  on   a 
smaller  scale.     It  was  very  pleasant  at  all  events  to 
see  the  dear  old  Spanish  flag  again  waving  over  the 
walls,  though  I  fear  this  will  be  the  last  occasion  on 
which  we  shall  meet  with  it  in  this  part  of  the  world. 
We  shall   leave  here  at   sunset;   I   shall  therefore 
resume  my  letter  at  our  next  halting-place,  which 
will  I  believe  be  Hayti.     Meanwhile  it  is  no  slight 
comfort  to  have  calm  weather  after  the  storms  of 
the  past  week.     ...          .          ... 

19th. — We  arrived  in  the  Bay  of  Jacmel  this 
morning,  and  landed  immediately,  as  we  were 
allowed  a  short  time  to  stay.  The  island  is  now 
more  generally  called  St.  Domingo,  than  by  its 
original  name  of  Hayti.  Whence  this  has  arisen  I 
know  not,  as  St.  Domingo  was  a  town  so  called  by 
Christopher  Columbus,  the  island  having  been  first 
discovered  by  him  on  Sunday;  but  up  to  very 
recently  it  has  been  called  indifferently  Hispaniola 
or  Hayti.  The  appearance  of  Jacmel  from  a  distance is  more  prepossessing  then  it  proves  to  be  on 
a  closer  inspection.  Of  course  I  speak  only  of  the 
town,  which  seen  from  the  sea  looks  Babylonian ;  that 
is,  laid  out  in  terraces  and  hanging  gardens,  but  turns 
out  really  nothing  of  the  sort,  merely  the  accidental 
grouping  of  some  trees  within  the  walls.  The 
scenery  around  is,  however,  beautiful,  as  only  the 
Antilles  are.  The  French  claim  for  Hayti,  the  same 
appellation  as  the  Spanish  do  for  Cuba,  "  La  Eeine 
des  Antilles."  Being  here  so  short  a  time,  and  able 
only  to  take  a  very  superficial  view  of  it,  I  am  of 
course  unable  to  determine  how  far  this  may  be 
merited.  Still  I  cannot  imagine  it  can  equal  Cuba, 
at  least  with  its  present  semi-savage  rulers.  What 
it  might  be  in  Spanish  hands,  to  whom  it  certainly 
legitimately  belongs,  is  another  question.  The  Emperor Soulouque,  the  Duke  of  Marmalade,  and  the 
rest  of  his  sugary  suite  are  at  Port-au-Prince,  so  we 
were  not  gratified  with  a  sight  of  them.  . 

Kingston,  Jamaica,  March  22nd.  —  We  landed 
here  this  morning  only,  though  we  arrived  last 
evening,  but  too  late  to  enter  Port  Eoyal  harbour, 
which  requires  daylight,  or  at  least  bright  moonlight. 
This  is  a  pity,  as  I  hear  the  view  is  fine  approaching 
Port  Eoyal  from  the  south.  We  are  not  going  to 
wait  to  see  any  sights  here  (if  any  exist)  at  present, 
but  have  engaged  a  carriage  to  take  us  to  Spanish 
Town,  about  twelve  miles  off;  whence  I  shall  despatch this  letter.  .  .  3  P.M.  we  have  just  arrived 
here;  had  a  very  pleasant  drive.  There  is  a  railroad 
for  the  benefit  of  people  in  a  hurry,  but  as  we  wished 
to  see  a  little  of  the  country,  we  preferred  the  slower 
mode  of  progress.  Our  friends  are  staying  in  the 
country,  enjoying  the  mountain  air  ;  but,  fortunately 
Sir  Joshua  Kowe  had  come  into  town  this  morning, 
and  so  received  us.  We  are  to  accompany  him  to- 
morrow to  The  Cedars,  his  mountain  residence. 
Adieu  now.  This  letter  will  go  back  by  the  return 
steamer.  Ever  your  affectionate, 

C. 