The  Cedars,  March  29th.  —  My  dear  Father,  - 
We  have  passed  a  very  pleasant  week  among  the 
hills  ;  the  scenery  of  Jamaica  is  certainly  very  beautiful, and  I  think  grows  upon  one  every  day;  at 
least  I  find  it  prettier  and  finer  now  than  I  did  the 
first  day.  The  verdure  is  perfectly  wonderful,  and 
the  view  from  the  lawn  of  The  Cedars,  of  hill  and 
valley  all  thickly  covered  with  trees  of  every  kind 
and  every  variety  of  tint,  with  Port  Royal  in  the 
distance,  and  the  sea  bounding  the  horizon,  form 
a  landscape  one  could  scarcely  ever  tire  of  gazing 
at.  I  think  my  chief  admiration  here  in  the  way 
of  trees  and  plants  are  the  orange  and  lemon  trees ; 
they  are  quite  lovely.  They  grow  to  a  great  height 
and  in  every  direction,  and  with  their  profusion 
of  golden  fruit,  snowy  flowers,  and  dark  glossy  leaves, 
all  in  full  bloom  at  the  same  time,  make  the  orange, 
in  my  opinion,  the  queen  of  plants.  There  is  a 
pretty  place  called  Keith  Hall  a  short  distance  from 
The  Cedars ;  but  higher  up  the  hill  side  they  command 
a  more  extensive  view,  and  one  particularly  beautiful, of  a  chain  of  hills,  and  one  especially  called 
Monte  Diablo.  I  also  observed  some  very  fine 
specimens  of  bamboo  trees ;  they  are  so  very  graceful 
and  fairy-like.  There  is  a  cluster  of  them  on  Sir 
Joshua  Howe's  property  that  look  exactly  like  a 
gigantic  bunch  of  Prince  of  Wales'  feathers. 

31st. — We  returned  to  town  yesterday.  To-day  we 
paid  a  visit  to  Lady  Barkly  at  Government  House &  
then  went  over  the  courts  of  justice  and  the  House 
of  Assembly:  nothing  very  remarkable  in  either. 
Matters  seem  in  a  very  bad  way  in  the  house, 
and  the  Governor  has  a  difficult  and  thankless  part 
to  play.  Quarrels  "never  ending,  still  beginning," 
seem  to  be  the  only  order  of  the  day  attended  to 
vigorously  in  the  Jamaican  parliament.  We  went 
afterwards  to  the  cathedral,  where  the  principal 
object  of  attraction  is  the  beautiful  marble  monument (by  Baily)  to  Lady  Elgin,  who  died  in  her 
youth  and  beauty  here  during  Lord  E.'s  governorship of  the  'island.  The  House  of  Assembly  voted 
a  sum  of  £-300  for  the  sculpture,  and  the  artist  has 
been  very  successful,  both  in  the  resemblance  of 
the  statue  to  the  original,  and  in  the  general  design 
and  execution  of  the  whole. 

April  4th. —  Rode  some  days  ago  to  a  most  romantic spot,  though  bearing  a  very  uncouth  name, 
"  the  Bog  Walk : "  without  any  exception,  the  loveliest  and  yet  the  strangest   bit  of  forest  scenery  I 
have   met  with  in  my  wanderings.     The  principal 
features  in  the  landscape  are  the  bamboo  trees,  and 
on  entering  the  particular  glade  called  the  (f  bog," 
a  most  wondrous  spectacle  is  presented  to  the  view ; 
the  graceful  branches  of  the  bamboos,  of  which  I 
have  before  spoken,  by  some  curious  fantaisie  of 
nature,   have   entwined    themselves   and  interlaced 
each  other  over  your  head.     The  effect  is  a  perfect 
gothic  arch,  and  as  it  is  repeated  and  continuous 
for  a  very  considerable  distance,   one  might  fancy 
oneself  in  the  "  long  drawn  aisle  and  fretted  vault " 
of  some  old  cathedral.     In  the  middle  of  this  aisle 
or  avenue  rushes  a  clear,  bright,  noisy  stream,  dashing 
turbulently  against  stones,  rocks,  and  other  obstacles 
that  come  in  its  way.      Between  this  stream  and 
the  stems  of  the  beautiful  arches  there  is  just  room 
for  a  horse  and  his  rider   to   pass.     The  name  of 
"  the  Bog  Walk  "  is,  I  hear,  an  English  corruption 
of  "La  Boca,"  or  some  say,  "La  Boca  de  Aqua," 
meaning   the   mouth   or   river's   mouth ;   the   little 
stream  I  have  mentioned  being  near  the  mouth  of 
one  of  Jamaica's  many  rivers.      The  island  is  greatly 
famed   for   the   number   and   variety  of  its  woods. 
Many  were  pointed  out  in  our  ride  to  day,  mahogany, 
satin  wood,  ebony,  lignum  vitae,  &c. 

5th. — Left  Sir  J.  and  Lady  Rowe  for  an  excursion 
of  a  few  days  in  the  mountains.    Drove  from  Spanish 
Town  to  the  terminus,  and  thence  by  the  railway 
to  Kingston.  We  had  here  a  fine  view  of  all  the 
shipping  in  this  harbour,  as  well  as  in  Port  Royal. 
In  the  latter  is  the  quarantine  ground ;  we  noticed 
a  good  number  of  victimised  ships  bearing  the  unlucky yellow  flag.  It  is  peculiarly  unfortunate  to 
be  detained  here  in  quarantine,  as  Port  Royal  and 
Kingston  are  considered  the  most,  if  not  the  only, 
unhealthy  parts  of  the  island. 

Hence  we  started  for  Newcastle,  a  distance  of 
fourteen  miles,  passing  through  "  Up  Park  Camp  " 
on  our  way.  This  is  a  military  station  containing 
a  force  varying  from  300  to  500  men,  according 
to  circumstances.  During  times  of  cholera,  fever, 
or  any  other  trouble,  Up  Park  is  considered  generally 
to  possess  purer  and  healthier  air  than  any  on  the 
coast.  About  eleven  miles  from  Kingston  we  arrived 
at  a  place  called  the  Botanical  Garden.  Once  upon 
a  time  a  garden  did  really  exist ;  now  there  is  but 
the  name.  It  is  the  limit  to  which  ordinary  shaped 
carriages  have  access ;  beyond  it  either  two  wheeled 
vehicles,  such  as  volantes,  or  gigs,  or  very  narrow 
carts,  are  the  only  means  of  passage  by  draught. 
We  rode  on  horseback,  my  old  friend  Col.  Luxmoore 
(who  by  a  curious  coincidence  commands  the  detachment of  the  16th  Regiment  now  at  Newcastle) 
having  sent  saddle  horses  for  our  use.  We  had  a 
pleasant  and  very  picturesque  ride  during  the  remainder  of  the  distance,  and  arrived  at  Col.  L.'s 
quarters  just  as  the  day  was  fading;  found  Mrs. 
Luxmoore  and  my  friend  Cissy  (her  daughter)  waiting 
to  welcome  me.  An  hour  after  this  we  sat  down 
to  a  merry  dinner,  consisting  chiefly  of  former  friends 
and  acquaintances.  The  last  time  we  met  having 
been  in  Greece,  we  little  anticipated  the  change  of 
scene  four  years  would  produce. 

8th. — This  is  the  funniest  little  nook  in  the  world ; 
there  is  scarcely  an  inch  of  level  ground  to  be  discovered far  or  near.  The  houses  or  cottages  used 
by  the  officers  as  quarters  are  scattered  about  in  every 
direction,  above  and  below,  some  of  them  perched  so 
high  as  to  be  very  difficult  of  access.  The  garden 
belonging  to  this  cottage  of  Col.  L.'s  where  we  are  is 
some  forty  feet  above  us ;  all  the  dwelling-places 
have  this  nest-like  appearance.  In  this  garden, 
which  when  arrived  at  is  remarkably  pretty,  grows 
a  natural  curiosity,  in  the  existence  of  which  I  certainly should  not  have  believed  had  I  not  actually 
seen  it;  namely,  a  green  rose.  There  were  three 
blossoming  on  the  bush,  besides  several  buds.  The 
flowers  were  in  all  respects  like  the  ordinary  pink, 
red,  or  white  rose,  the  same  soft  velvety  leaves,  only 
of  a  pale  green  colour ;  in  all  other  particulars  the 
plant  was  just  like  any  other,  the  stalks,  thorns,  green 
leaves,  &c.  I  was  allowed  to  gather  one  of  the 
three  blossoms  I  had  seen  in  flower,  and  have  placed 
it  between  the  leaves  of  this  book ;  not  that  I  shall 
expect  any  one  who  may  see  it  hereafter  in  its  faded 
hue  to  believe  in  its  original  one,  unless  they  too 
should  have  visited  Newcastle  and  Col.  Luxmoore's 
garden.  I  shall  close  this  letter  now,  or  it  will  be 

too  voluminous. 

Ever  your  affectionate, 

C. 