Newcastle,  Jamaica,  April  10th. — My  dear  Father, 
-—We  made  an  excursion  on  horseback  the  day 
before  yesterday  to  the  St.  Katharine  hills.  They 
are  off-shoots  from  the  Blue  Mountain  chain.  One 
might  well  fancy  oneself  in  Scotland,  or,  I  should 
perhaps  rather  say,  in  Wales.  The  keen  cold  air  (we 
are  about  4000  feet  above  the  sea),  the  smooth  green 
grass  covered  hills,  bear  a  great  resemblance  to  the 
scenery  of  some  of  our  excursions  among  the  Welsh 
mountains  and  valleys.  This,  however,  though  very 
healthy  and  beneficial  to  the  troops  after  being  baked 
in  Kingston,  is  the  least  pleasant  and  least  pretty  expedition I  have  yet  made.  It  is  too  bleak  and  too 
poor  looking  to  be  appreciated  after  the  warmth  and 
the  luxuriant  vegetation  we  have  so  lately  left.  Next 
day  we  made  a  far  more  agreeable  excursion  to  Charlottenberg,  the  country  residence  of  the  Bishop  of 
Jamaica.  I  have  rarely  been  so  strongly  tempted  to 
break  the  tenth  commandment  as  I  was  on  entering 
this  delightful  abode  ;  that  it  belongs  to  a  Bishop,  too, 
makes  the  enormity  of  my  coveting  worse  still.  I 
thoroughly  realised  on  this  spot  the  poet's  apostrophe to  a  yet  very  different  scene. 

"  A  blending  of  all  beauties  ;  streams  and  dells, 
Fruit,  foliage,  crag,  wood,  mountain,  cornfield  " — 

the  last  word  must  here  be  omitted  as  the  "  vine  "  is 
not  one  of  the  blended  beauties  in  this  fair  scene. 
Grapes  do  exist  nevertheless  in  Jamaica,  and  are  excellent-flavoured ;  but  the  vine  is  not  a  distinctive 
feature  or  characteristic  of  the  country.  It  would 
be  difficult  to  single  out  any  one  particular  class  of 
tree  or  plant  in  the  rich  and  varied  tract  of  country, 
spread  before  us  to-day,  as  an  especial  object  of  admiration. When  you  have  mangoes,  cocoa-nuts, 
allspice  (pimento),  olives,  tamarinds,  banana,  oranges, 
pomegranates,  sugar,  and  coffee,  all  growing  in  luxuriant profusion  around,  you  are  too  much  dazzled 
with  the  whole  to  be  able  to  specify  what  is  the  most 
beautiful.  At  least  I  found  it  so.  Then  besides  the 
wonderful  scene  of  fertility  I  have  been  trying  to 
describe,  the  magnificence  of  the  view  can  scarcely 
be  imagined  from  the  terrace  of  Charlottenberg, 
backed  by  the  noble  range  of  the  Blue  Mountains, 
and  bounded  at  the  horizon  by  the  azure  coloured 
sea.  The  house  is  in  perfect  keeping  with  the 
gardens  and  other  external  belongings  of  the  Bishop. 
The  rooms  are  spacious  and  cool.  The  floors  beautifully  inlaid  with  specimens  of  the  various  woods 
grown  in  Jamaica;  tables,  chairs,  and  other  furniture of  carved  ebony.  Having  visited  the  principal 
rooms,  we  proceeded  to  a  little  summer  house,  where 
we  took  some  refreshment,  and  gazed  once  more  at 
the  enchanting  view  beneath  us,  through  the  medium 
of  stained  glass  of  different  colours,  which  is  let  in  here 
and  there  in  the  windows.  To-morrow  we  are  to  set  out 
on  the  last  expedition  of  any  consequence  we  shall 
make  in  this  part  of  the  world  ;  namely,  we  purpose 
making  the  ascent  of  the  Blue  Mountain  Peak.  The 
difficulties  are  great,  I  hear,  and  some  of  our  friends 
think  the  undertaking  very  hazardous.  On  the  other 
hand,  I  am  told  that  with  good  courage  and  good 
will  to  persevere,  we  can  do  it;  and  that,  moreover, Lord  Metcalfe  went  up  when  he  was  an  old 
man,  and  suffering  from  the  gout ;  so  under  these 
circumstances  I  think  there  can  be  scarcely  any  unconquerable difficulties  for  us.  The  actual  height  is 
nothing'particular,  merely  8000  feet,  yet  I  understand 
the  chief  actual  inconvenience  one  suffers  is  from  the 
excessive  rarity  of  the  air,  and  the  consequent 
difficulty  of  breathing.  I  shall  be  glad,  however,  if 
we  should  be  ultimately  successful,  and  reach  the  top 
without  any  hindrance,  as  among  other  objects  to  be 
attained,  is  a  sight  of  dear  old  Cuba,  which  will 
much  rejoice  me  to  behold  once  more,  before  taking 
my  departure  from  the  west. 
llth. — We  left  Newcastle  on  horseback  about  10 
o'clock  A.M.  Our  destination  this  evening  being  the 
house  of  a  Mr.  Pownall,  who  resides  at  the  foot  of 
the  mountain,  having  come  here  many  years  ago,  and 
lived  at  his  present  abode  ever  since.  From  his 
house  I  am  now  writing  this.  We  passed  over  a 
considerable  part  of  the  country  to-day,  which  we 
saw  yesterday  from  Charlottenberg.  Found  a  close 
examination  as  beautiful  in  its  way  as  the  more  distant one.  The  coffee  plantations  especially  gain  on 
a  near  approach ;  the  perfume  is  delicious,  and  the 
plant,  whether  in  the  flower  or  berry,  is  graceful  and 
pretty.  An  extensive  estate,  part  of  which  we  traversed, was  pointed  out  to  me  as  having  formed  a 
portion  of  the  Duke  of  Buckingham's  property  in 
this  island.  We  reached  Mr.  P.'s  "hermitage" 
about  3  o'clock,  and  were  welcomed  by  him  with 
much  civility.  It  is  a  curious  fancy  that  has  led 
this  gentleman  here.  I  understand  he  was  formerly 
a  farmer,  and  lived  in  Essex  (rather  a  contrast  to  the 
Blue  Mountain).  Some  accidental  circumstance 
having  caused  him  to  pay  a  visit  to  Jamaica,  here  he 
has  remained  ever  since,  and  has  farmed  his  little  tropical estate  very  successfully.  He  calls  himself 
"  the  old  man  of  the  mountain,"  of  which  for  many 
years  past  he  has  done  the  honours  to  all  comers. 
We  sat  down  to  dinner  shortly  after  our  arrival,  a 
plentiful  repast  in  the  English  style.  A  "  distinguished  dish,"  to  my  great  amusement,  being  broad 
beans  and  bacon.  Our  host  thinks  we  may  safely  try 
the  experiment  to-morrow  morning,  and  he  proposes 
to  accompany  us  as  well  as  our  present  party,  and 
the  regular  guides.  It  seems  the  grand  difficulty  to 
be  conquered,  is  a  place  commonly  called  "Jacob's 
Ladder,"  which  people  ascend  as  they  can,  there 
being  no  steps  and  no  path,  and  only  at  rare  intervals any  terra  firma  on  which  to  plant  the  feet.  This 
does  not  sound  pleasant ;  but  we  shall  see  what  tomorrow will  bring.  Our  meal  being  ended,  we 
strolled  out  to  look  at  the  coffee  garden  attached  to 
the  house.  The  trees  are  now  in  full  bloom,  of  a 
pale  pink  colour.  The  odour  is  most  agreeable,  very 
aromatic.  This  is  a  very  small  plantation,  Mr.  P. 
farming  it  for  his  own  private  use,  as  I  suppose  he 
would  turnips  in  his  native  Essex.  What  a  difference ! 

12th. —  Well,  the  Peak  is  a  fait  accompli,  and  we 
are  alive  to  tell  the  tale ;  but  it  is  an  undertaking  I 
should  be  very  sorry  to  attempt  again,  and  one  I 
should  not  have  pursued  now  to  the  end,  had  it  been 
practicable  to  return ;  but  this  was  impossible.  I  will 
presently  say  why.  Bttftooft  Librwy 

We  started  betimes  in  the  morning,  a  party  of 
five  besides  the  guides.  For  about  two  miles  and  a 
half  we  rode  on  ponies ;  and  this,  though  comparatively easy  work  to  the -rest  of  the  journey,  was  in 
itself  rather  dangerous ;  at  least  we  ran  the  risk  of 
our  faces  and  features  being  disfigured  several  times. 
A  kind  of  track,  it  can  scarcely  be  termed  a  path  or 
road,  has  been  cut  through  the  dense  tangled  masses 
of  vegetation  with  which  the  sides  of  the  mountain 
are  clothed ;  but  as  the  visits  of  strangers  to  the 
Peak  are  few  and  far  between,  the  prolific  soil  allows 
of  considerable  growth  of  branches,  leaves,  and 
parasite  creepers  of  all  descriptions  in  the  intervals 
between  the  times  of  cutting  the  track.  To  day,  as 
we  were  all  obliged  to  advance  in  single  file,  and  our 
ponies  were  chiefly  anxious  to  follow  each  other 
without  troubling  themselves  about  their  riders,  we 
were  repeatedly  caught,  sometimes  across  the  eyes, 
sometimes  across  the  mouth,  and  last  and  worst, 
under  the  chin,  narrowly  escaping  strangulation,  by 
the  boughs  and  tendrils  of  the  trees  and  their  parasites, interlacing  each  other  across  our  path.  For 
my  own  part  I  speedily  found  my  only  chance  of 
safety  lay  in  leaving  my  pony  to  his  own  devices, 
and  providing  for  myself  as  well  as  I  could.  So, 
quickly  twisting  my  bridle  round  the  pommel,  I  laid 
myself  as  flat  down  as  I  could,  on  the  neck  of  my 
gallant  steed,  and  extended  my  legs  towards  his  tail ; 
and  in  this  interesting  Mazeppa-like  attitude  (which 
would  have  made  my  fortune  at  Astley's)  was  accomplished the  remainder  of  the  equestrian  portion 
of  our  course.  We  now  had  to  proceed  on  foot,  and 
for  about  a  mile  or  so  we  found  the  ascent  no  very 
formidable  task  —  stumbling  over  the  stumps  of  old 
trees,  and  entangling  oneself  in  briars,  being  the 
worst  catastrophes  to  speak  of.  Soon,  however,  occurred a  change,  of  which  the  first  symptom  was 
want  of  breath,  and  a  necessity  of  stopping  every 
few  steps,  to  try  and  recover  it.  The  cold,  too,  now 
became  intense.  Just  before  reaching  the  terrible 
Jacob's  Ladder,  at  a  sudden  turn  of  the  path,  a 
splendid  view  burst  upon  our  sight,  and  with  which 
I  heartily  wish  we  had  contented  ourselves,  and 
advanced  no  further.  From  the  pinnacle  on  which 
we  were  perched,  we  seemed  to  look  straight  down 
several  thousand  feet,  and  where  the  orange  trees 
apparently  dipped  their  branches  into  the  clear  bright 
waves  beneath.  This,  however,  was  an  optical  delu- 
sion—  the  projection  of  the  land  giving  the  branches 
the  appearance  of  touching  the  water,  though  in 
reality  some  hundred  feet  above  it.  Finally,  at  the 
edge  of  the  horizon  could  be  just  faintly  traced  the 
outline  of  the  Cuban  coast,  and  the  highland  near 
Sant  Jago  de  Cuba.  I  understand  now  whence  the 
name  of  Jacob's  Ladder  is  derived.  This  is  to  all 
intents  and  purposes  a  road  through  the  air,  the 
mode  of  progress  being  catching  hold  of  branches  of 
trees,  and  by  their  means  swinging  or  hoisting  yourself up,  till  you  find  a  resting  place,  or  perch  for  the 
sole  of  your  foot,  on  some  bough  or  stump,  and  so 
on  ad  infinitum.  For  a  few  yards  we  got  on  tolerably, though  the  fatigue  was  something  beyond  conception, for  it  is  scarcely  ever  possible  to  be  helped 
by  any  other  person,  as  each  one  is  generally  on  a 
different  level.  I  would  have  gladly  now  abandoned 
the  project,  but  to  retrace  one's  steps  on  Jacob's 
Ladder,  is  an  impossibility.  One  may  get  up,  one 
cannot  get  down  these  aerial  steps.  Exhaustion,  cold, 
and  the  painful  gasping  for  breath,  from  which  we 
were  now  suffering,  made  it  very  problematical 
whether  we  could  move  another  step.  Brandy  and 
milk  (a  curious  concoction)  was  now  administered, 
at  least  so  it  was  said  to  be ;  but  I  was  past  all  power 
of  tasting,  or  even  of  knowing  any  thing  crossed  my 
lips.  I  can  only  suppose  the  instinct  of  self-preservation impelled  us  onwards,  as  we  did  eventually 
reach  the  summit.  Here  I  must  have  lost  all  consciousness, for  on  coming  to  myself,  I  found  I  was 
seated  on  the  ground,  in  a  little  log  hut,  before  a 
blazing  fire ;  two  people  chafing  my  hands,  which 
were  turned  almost  slate  colour,  and  a  third  trying 
to  insinuate  a  glass  of  wine  between  my  lips,  which 
they  informed  me  were  of  the  same  beautiful  hue. 
E.  told  me  she  had  been  in  much  the  same  plight, 
but  had  recovered  more  quickly.  The  shelter  from 
the  keen  air,  and  the  cheerful  warmth  of  the  fire, 
gradually  restored  us  to  our  natural  feelings  and  complexions, and  then  we  were  not  long  in  discovering 
that  we  were  in  a  state  bordering  on  starvation  ;  so 
we  very  soon  set  to,  with  right  good  will,  to  demolish 
the  excellent  luncheon  our  host  had  provided.  We 
then  proceeded  to  look  at  the  prospect  we  had  incurred such  hardships  in  trying  to  see.  I  was  not  a 
little  provoked  at  finding  it  in  nearly  all  respects  the 
same  as  we  had  enjoyed  at  the  foot  of  Jacob's  Ladder. 
Soon  after  this  we  commenced  the  descent,  but  not 
by  the  same  route.  I -should  have  thought  we  might 
have  gone  up  by  the  road  we  came  down,  but  they 
tell  me  it  would  have  been  impossible,  so  I  take  it 
upon  trust,  as  I  certainly  shall  not  make  the  experiment. We  reached  the  hermitage  safely,  though 
terribly  tired. 

13th. —  Much  refreshed  from  a  good  long  night's 
rest.  Said  good-bye  to  the  hermit,  and  rode  back  to 
Newcastle,  where  we  found  our  friends  much  astonished to  hear  we  had  actually  accomplished  the 
ascent,  they  having  believed  we  should  take  alarm  at 
the  last  moment. 

20th,  St.  Thomas.  —  We  sail  for  England  at  midnight. Since  writing  the  foregoing  last  pages  we 
returned  to  Spanish  Town  and  were  enabled  to  spend 
two  pleasant  days  with  Sir  J.  and  Lady  Rowe,  whom 
we  left  with  much  regret.  This  is  the  fifth  visit  we 
have  paid  to  St.  Thomas  since  we  left  home.  Still, 
in  my  opinion,  it  is  as  pretty  and  as  green  as  ever.
I  shall  always  keep  a  kindly  remembrance  of  it,  and 
think  of  it  as  of  an  old  friend.  Our  long  and  varied 
journey  is  now  drawing  to  its  close.  Between  this 
and  England  it  is  scarcely  probable  anything  worth 
chronicling  will  arise.  We  have  bid  farewell  to  the 
many  friends  and  companions  of  our  voyages,  a  sorrowful enough  task,  only  brightened  by  anticipations 
of  the  future,  and,  on  my  side,  of  seeing  you  and 

home  again. 

Till  then  adieu, 

Your  ever  affectionate  daughter, 
CLARA  FITZROY  PALEY. 

April,  1854. 