August  9th.  —  Left  Richmond  at  7  A.  M.,  and  after 
about  five  hours  in  the  train,  reached  a  place  they 
call  Aquia  Creek,  where  we  embarked  on  a  steamer, 
the  Baltimore,  which  conveyed  us  up  the  river 
Potomac  to  Washington,  a  pleasant  little  voyage  ; 
the  banks  of  the  river  green  and  pretty,  though 
tame.  In  this  part  of  the  United  States  there  is 
much  resemblance  to  our  counties  of  Kent  and 
Surrey.  Green  fields,  orchards,  and  a  kitchen- 
gardeny  look  about  the  country,  added  to  red  brick 
houses  in  the  towns,  still  further  increases  the  likeness. The  people,  however,  are  different  in  almost 
every  respect.  Nothing  strikes  me  more,  as  an 
Englishwoman,  than  the  interest,  or  as  some  call 
it,  the  curiosity,  displayed  by  the  people  here  about 
the  affairs  of  strangers.  They  guess,  reckon,  or 
calculate  upon  all  your  actions,  and  even  your 
motives.  Nevertheless,  I  am  never  inclined  either 
to  think  or  treat  this  inquisitiveness  as  an  impertinence, and,  moreover,  I  do  not  think  they  mean 
it  themselves  as  such ;  I  believe  it  arises  from  their 
desire  to  compare  themselves,  their  sayings  and 
doings,  with  every  stranger  they  come  across,  and 
in  their  anxiety  to  do  this,  they  occasionally  lose 
sight  of  the  bounds  of  good  breeding.  On  the 
other  hand  we  English  go  into  an  opposite  extreme. 
The  indifference  with  which  we  view  everybody  we 
do  not  know,  the  fright  we  are  in  lest  we  should 
know  some  one  who  is  not  as  high  up  as  ourselves 
in  the  social  scale.  And  as  to  asking  questions! 
I  suspect  if  we  could,  Asmodeus-like,  look  into 
the  minds  of  nineteen  out  of  twenty  travellers  who 
meet  each  other  at  home,  their  reflexions  would 
run  somewhat  as  follows :  "  I  don't  care  where  you 
live  or  what  you  are,  where  you  come  from  or 
where  you  are  going  to,  and  I  only  hope  you  are 
not  going  to  speak  to  me."  But  though,  as  I  have 
said,  I  do  not  think  the  Americans  mean  rudeness 
by  their  curiosity,  they  are  quite  the  most  conceited 
people  possible;  their  comparisons,  which  I  have 
before  mentioned,  are  never  by  any  chance  turned 
to  their  own  disadvantage.  Whatever  the  subject, 
trivial  or  important,  theirs  is  the  victory,  "they 
beat  all  creation."  And  yet,  until  the  Americans 
cure  themselves  of  some  of  their  personal  habits, 
to  which  it  would  be  disagreeable  more  particularly 
to  allude,  I  think  they  can  scarcely  be  suffered 
to  class  themselves  among  civilised  nations,  and 
certainly  not  among  civilised  society.  I  have  rarely 
seen,  on  our  side  of  the  Atlantic,  peasants  or  artisans 
so  offensive  in  their  personal  actions  as  I  regret  to 
say  those  who  call  themselves  American  gentlemen. 
Apropos  of  peculiarities  and  habits,  I  am  rather 
amused  at  the  announcements  printed  and  hung 
up  behind  all  the  room  doors  in  the  hotels  on  the 
subject  of  stealing.  We  must  at  least  give  them 
credit  for  the  candour  with  which  they  acknowledge 
their  propensities  towards  thieving  or  annexing,  as 
I  suppose  they  would  call  it  themselves.  You  are 
solemnly  warned  by  these  notices  always  to  lock 
your  door  and  remove  your  key  when  you  leave 
the  room,  "if  you  wish  to  avoid  being  robbed," 
and  to  bolt  your  door  inside  at  night  "for  fear 
of  night  visitors." — To  return  to  our  voyage  after 
this  long  digression.  About  fifteen  miles  below 
Washington,  we  passed  Mount  Vernon,  the  residence and  burial-place  of  the  patriot.  We  could 
barely  distinguish  the  monument;  but  the  place 
seemed  very  still  and  well  formed  for  a  refuge  from 
the  turmoil  of  public  life. 

August  10th. — I  forget  what  author  remarks  on 
Washington,  that  "it  is  a  city  of  magnificent  intentions." The  expression  is  very  well  chosen.  It 
might  be,  and  should  the  day  ever  dawn  on  its 
entire  completion,  it  will  be  most  splendid.  Seen 
from  a  little  distance  few  towns  in  the  world  could 
compare  with  it,  but  on  a  near  view  the  charm  dissolves. Everything  is  being  built,  nothing  finished ; 
and  even  those  buildings  which  to  all  appearance 
are  complete  and  unexceptionable,  do  not  satisfy 
the  prevailing  mania.  They  will  not  let  well  alone, 
but  must  be  ever  altering,  enlarging,  improving, 
and  what  not,  until  the  whole  place  resembles  a 
stone-mason's  yard,  instead  of  the  metropolis  of  a 
state,  and  the  seat  of  its  government.  The  capitol 
is  a  most  magnificent  structure,  and  might  very 
well  vie  with  the  architectural  chefs-d'oeuvre  of 
Rome  or  Athens,  were  it  only  left  in  peace.  But 
they  must  "  go  ahead,"  and  accordingly  have  begun 
to  build  two  wings,  which  will  not,  I  think,  improve 
the  original  design ;  and,  en  attendant)  obliges  one 
to  wade  through  stones,  dust,  and  marble  on  every 
side.  The  interior  of  the  capitol  is  very  simple, 
the  only  ornamental  part  being  immediately  under 
the  dome,  which  is  used  apparently  as  a  sort  of 
lobby  by  the  members  of  Congress  between  the 
acts  of  their  debates.  This  dome  is  hung  round 
with  pictures,  by  American  artists,  of  the  principal 
events  in  their  country's  history.  They  include 
the  baptism  of  Pocahontas,  the  discovery  of  America 
by  Christopher  Columbus,  and  the  landing  of  the 
Pilgrim  Fathers.  The  rest  are  devoted  to  the 
various  memorable  episodes  in  the  life  of  George 
Washington.  Of  these  the  most  remarkable  and 
the  most  frequently  repeated  on  their  canvass  are 
those  occasions  on  which  the  enemy  surrendered  to 
him.  From  the  summit  of  the  steps  of  the  capitol, 
and  at  the  end  of  a  long  avenue  of  noble  trees, 
is  seen  the  colossal  statue  of  Washington,  with  the 
following  short  but  graceful  inscription  on  the 
pedestal :  "  Greorge  Washington,  the  first  in  peace, 
the  first  in  war,  and  the  first  in  the  hearts  of  his 
countrymen."  Taken  as  a  whole,  the  effect  of 
this  is  very  fine,  the  charming  scenery  of  the  background, the  windings  of  the  Potomac,  the  fine 
old  trees  which  completely  screen  the  city  from 
view,  all  unite  to  give  the  capitol  an  air  of  solitary 
grandeur.  The  Post-office,  the  Treasury,  the  President's house,  and  the  Patent-office  are  each  and 
all  superb  buildings,  seen  from  a  little  distance, 
as  we  did  in  taking  a  carriage  drive  round  the 
environs.  The  impression  given  by  this  distant 
view  is  that  Washington  is  one  of  the  most  splendid 
towns  in  the  world ;  but  alas  !  the  illusion  is  soon 
dispelled.  The  buildings  are  there,  certainly,  but 
not  one  of  them  is  finished ;  the  streets  are  laid 
out  and  named  with  the  most  ludicrous  regularity, 
but  for  the  most  part  are  guiltless  of  houses.  Brick- 
dust,  stone-dust,  and  marble-dust  nearly  suffocate 
you  at  every  step,  besides  being  lamed  in  stumbling 
over  stones  and  splinters  of  every  description  in  your 
path.  A  memorial  has  been  begun  to  be  erected 
to  Washington,  and  all  the  states  of  the  Union 
contribute  something  to  it  in  the  shape  of  a  piece 
of  sculptured  marble.  Each  piece  is  to  be  employed 
and  placed  somewhere  when  the  whole  is  completed ; 
but  when  will  that  be,  I  wonder  ?  The  people  themselves give  half  a  century  before  they  expect  its 
completion.  The  worst  of  it  is,  judging  from  the 
model,  I  think  it  will  be  but  an  ugly  affair  after 
all.  The  drawing  resembles  a  large  manufacturing 
chimney.  We  returned  to  our  hotel  (Brown's,  Pennsylvania  Avenue)  tired  and  almost  bewildered  with 
our  wanderings  about.  How  wonderfully  cheap, 
and  generally  speaking,  how  very  good  the  American 
hotels  are !  This*  one  we  are  at,  for  instance,  we 
have  two  very  nice  rooms,  drawing-room  and  bedroom; the  meals  are  breakfast,  dinner,  tea,  and 
supper,  all  of  which  are  plentifully  supplied  with 
the  best  food  and  a  great  variety,  and  for  which 
everything,  light  and  all  included,  the  charge  is 
a  dollar  and  a  half  each  per  diem.  They  give  you 
a  menu  when  you  come  down  to  breakfast  of 
the  morning's  provision, —  eggs,  omelettes,  kidneys, 
"  chicken-fixings,"  cutlets,  mushrooms,  are  the  usual 
items  from  which  you  select  what  you  like.  Then 
there  is  an  endless  variety  of  bread  made  of  Indian 
corn,  hominy,  and  other  sorts  of  grain,  but  I  cannot, 
at  least  yet,  like  any  of  these,  they  are  so  very  heavy, 
so  I  generally  adhere  to  buttered  toast,  which  they 
do  to  perfection.  As  I  am  about  to  proceed  to 
supper,  the  long  drive  having  made  me  remarkably 
hungry,  I  shall  resume  my  letter  to-morrow,  after 
having  visited  some  more  of  the  Washington  objects 
of  interest. 

This  morning  was  occupied  in  the  inspection  of 
several  of  the  public  buildings  of  which  we  had 
only  seen  the  exterior  yesterday.  These  were  the 
Patent-office,  the  Post-office,  the  Smithsonian  Institute, and  the  President's  house.  The  Patent-office  is  really  a  noble  building,  and  fortunately  it 
is  not  only  finished,  but  speaking  comparatively, 
it  may  almost  be  termed  an  ancient  structure.  It 
was  one  of  the  very  few,  indeed  I  believe  it  was 
the  only  one,  of  the  great  institutions  which  escaped 
destruction  in  1814,  when  our  English  general  Eoss, 
by  his  famous  coup-de-main,  marched  upon  Washington, and  before  the  surprised  enemy  could  offer 
any  effectual  resistance,  had  set  fire  to  the  capitol, 
including  its  library,  the  docks,  the  Treasury,  the 
President's  abode,  the  war-office,  a  great  bridge, 
and  two  or  three  ships  of  war, — a  pretty  good  day's 
work  !  But  the  Patent-office,  as  I  have  said,  escaped 
the  general  conflagration,  owing,  they  say,  to  the 
strong  intercession  of  its  then  director.  The  building is  of  white  marble,  and  in  the  Italian  style  of 
architecture.  One  very  beautiful  room,  which  is 
devoted  to  the  reception  of  the  various  inventions 
for  which  patents  have  been  obtained,  is  upwards 
of  120  feet  long,  and  is  adorned  with  a  double  row 
of  marble  columns,  supporting  an  arched  roof  finely 
sculptured  with  bas-reliefs.  From  this  we  went  to 
the  Post-office,  also  a  handsome  marble  structure, 
and  thence  to  the  President's,  called  also  the  ' f  white 
house."  The  congress  not  being  in  session  now,  both 
this  and  the  capitol  are  deserted,  so  that  one  may 
roam  over  them  at  pleasure.  The  white  house  is 
singularly  simple  and  unpretending  in  its  interior 
decoration,  certainly  it  cannot  fairly  be  termed  a 
palace,  and  it  is  scarcely  equal  to  a  tolerably  well- 
appointed  private  abode.  Before  leaving  this  part 
of  the  city  we  visited  the  Congress  library,  which 
we  had  not  entered  previously.  It  is  in  one  wing 
of  the  capitol,  and  contains  28,000  volumes.  We 
closed  our  peregrinations  by  the  inspection  of  the 
Smithsonian  Institute,  one  of  the  many  examples 
of  private  benevolence  and  liberality  abounding 
throughout  the  States.  It  is  a  curious  and  picturesque-looking building  of  a  red  granite  and  in 
the  old  turretted  style  of  architecture.  It  has  ten 
towers,  one  in  the  centre  much  higher  than  the 
others.  We  were  not,  however,  admitted  beyond 
the  grounds,  a  lecture  being  in  course  of  delivery. 
As  perhaps  I  shall  have  no  other  opportunity  of 
despatching  a  letter  before  arriving  at  New  York, 
I  shall  send  this  off  to-night,  for  "  I  calculate  "  it 
will  just  catch  the  English  mail.     It  would  amuse 

you   to   hear  how  beautifully  E imitates  the 

Yankee  twang.     I  am  not  so  clever  at  it  by  a  long 
way,  but  with  her  it  sounds  quite  genume.     Adios. 
Ever  your  affectionate 
C. 