Baltimore,  August  16th.  —  My  dear  Father,  — We 
came  here  yesterday  afternoon,  in  about  an  hour  and 
a  half  from  Washington.  The  country  through  which 
we  passed  was  very  beautiful,  and  I  should  have 
admired  it  still  more  but  that  I  thought  once  or 
twice  we  were  going  to  "  eternal  smash,"  as  they  say 
here.  We  travelled  much  faster  than  I  ever  recollect 
doing  in  England,  and  frequently  far  too  rapidly  to  be 
safe.  The  distance  between  Washington  and  Baltimore is  but  forty  miles,  and  an  hour  and  a  half  for  traversing that  space  would  have  been  moderate  enough, 
but  a  very  considerable  delay  took  place  at  a  station 
called  Annapolis,  and  then  I  suppose  to  make  up  lee 
way  they  found  it  necessary  to  go  like  "  greased  lightning ! "  What  immoderate  water-drinkers  the  Americans are !  There  is  water  in  the  trains,  water 
in  the  boats,  water  in  the  railway-stations,  water 
in  the  drawing-rooms,  and  to  make  matters  worse, 
at  dinner  (I  am  speaking  of  the  table  d'hote  dinners 
on  the  road),  instead  of  taking  a  little  wine  or  beer, 
like  people  in  general,  they  drink  oceans  of  milk 
diluted  with  water.  It  is  to  me  most  unpleasant 
to  look  at,  especially  when  accompanying  rich  entrees 
and  sauces,  not  to  speak  of  fat  pork,  which  is  also  a 
very  favourite  dish,  but  does  not  in  my  opinion 
look  at  all  agreeable  in  juxtaposition  with  a  great 
tumbler  of  milk.  As  we  hear  that  Baltimore  does 
not  offer  many  attractions  to  a  casual  visitor,  we 
are  enjoying  a  quiet  morning.  I  can  quite  appreciate the  feeling  of  some  traveller  I  have  read 
of,  who  on  arriving  I  forget  where,  thanked  heaven 
there  was  nothing  to  be  seen.  In  a  hurried  journey 
one  gets  sadly  tired  of  lionising.  Besides  I  cannot 
but  feel  the  almost  impossibility  of  giving  any  original 
remarks,  or  of  telling  you  or  any  one  else  anything 
which  you  have  not  repeatedly  heard  before,  though 
may  be  in  varied  forms,  about  the  United  States. 
I  take  it  there  is  no  other  country  in  the  world 
that  has  been  so  often,  so  thoroughly,  and  so  well 
delineated  as  this,  not  even  Italy. 

Since  writing  the  above  we  have  been  out,  and 
I  am  sorry  to  say  there  is  more  to  see  than  I  anticipated. Joking  apart,  however,  there  are  some 
memorials  of  the  past  peculiarly  interesting  to  English 
people.  The  town  itself  is  pretty  nearly  what  I 
expected,  busy  and  commercial;  red-brick  houses, 
and  no  end  of  factories  and  smoke.  But  besides 
all  this  there  are  some  famous  monuments.  I  should 
mention  perhaps  that  Baltimore  is  called,  par  excellence, "  the  monumental  city."  First,  and  principally, there  is  a  very  fine  one  in  honour  of  Washington, a  Doric  column,  160  feet  high,  surmounted  by 
his  statue.  It  is  a  magnificent  structure,  and  I  think 
far  superior  to  that  in  the  city  of  Washington. 
Another,  called  Battle  Monument,  is  erected  to  the 
memory  of  the  defenders  of  the  city  in  that  same 
year,  1814,  when  the  English,  after  the  cruel  havoc 
they  had  made  at  Washington,  essayed  a  like  exploit 
here,  but  were  repulsed  after  bombarding  the  fort 
(Henry)  for  twenty-four  hours.  The  unfortunate 
General  Eoss,  who  commanded  the  English  land 
troops,  was  killed  in  the  melee,  and  the  fleet  (consisting of  sixteen  ships),  under  Admiral  Cochrane,  was 
also  compelled  to  retire.  The  third  and  last  trophy 
I  need  mention,  is  a  monument  in  honour  of  Colonel 
Armistead,  the  American  Commander,  and  is  in  the 
form  of  a  pyramid  made  with  cannon,  and  surmounted 
with  shot  and  shells.  I  forgot  to  tell  you  that  we  are 
located  at  a  hotel  yclept  "  Barnums."  I  am  quite 
curious  to  know  whether  the  proprietor  is  any  relation 
to  the  famous  manager  of  that  name.  We  purpose, 
for  a  change,  as  the  weather  is  so  fine,  leaving  here 
at  seven  this  evening,  taking  a  moonlight  flitting. 
The  train  ought  to  reach  Philadelphia  at  midnight, 
and  as  the  moon  is  now  about  the  full,  and  gloriously 
bright,  I  think  it  will  be  a  good  opportunity  of  seeing 
some  American  scenery  under  a  fresh  aspect.  .  .  . 
Nous  void  safely  deposited  in  the  very  middle  of  the 
Quaker  city,  at  the  Grirard  House,  a  most  magnificent 
looking  hotel  at  all  events.  The  nocturnal  journey 
turned  out  well,  and  as  I  expected,  the  beautiful 
moonlight  gave  a  romantic  tint  to  all  it  shone  upon, 
in  spite  of  the  prosy  squeaking  engine  and  the  lumbering cars.  The  passage  of  the  Eiver  Schuylkill 
(what  a  name !),  a  little  before  entering  the  town, 
was  an  especially  picturesque  incident.  Philadelphia 
is  generally  called  the  "  prettiest  city  in  the  States," 
on  what  grounds  I  cannot  imagine,  unless  beauty  is 
supposed  to  consist  in  the  most  painfully  straight 
lines  and  acute  angles.  Judging  from  the  aspect 
of  the  town  in  this  morning's  perambulation,  I 
think  it  probable  I  should  expire  of  ennui  in  a 
week  if  forced  to  stay.  I  must  endeavour  to  describe 
its  general  appearance,  however,  in  order  that  you 
may  form  your  own  opinion,  as  may  be,  my  artistic 
dislike  to  extreme  regularity  renders  me  unduly  prejudiced. So,  first  of  all,  there  are  two  rivers :  the 
before-mentioned  unpronounceable  Schuylkill,  and 
the  Delaware.  Well,  nature  made  them,  so  they  are 
not  quite  straight.  The  city  is  built  between  them, 
and  I  cannot  liken  the  long  undeviating  rows  into 
which  the  streets  are  sliced,  to  anything  better  than 
the  bars  of  a  gridiron,  so  formal,  so  guiltless  of  a 
curve.  There  are  many  jokes  flying  about  at  the  expense  of  the  prim  and  precise  Philadelphians  ;  among 
others  it  is  said  that  owing  to  their  excessive  correctness they  object  to  resort  to  the  usual  and  more  simple formula  of  language  generally  employed,  but  that 
if  you  ask  your  way  of  a  passer-by,  you  will  be  directed to  take  the  third  turning  towards  the  east, 
thence  proceed  due  north,  whence  the  place  you  seek 
will  be  found  to  your  south-west.  Or  perchance  at 
dinner  you  may  be  requested  to  hand  the  pickled 
cucumbers  that  lie  on  the  south-east  of  the  stewed 
ham;  or  the  dish  of  Indian  corn  to  the  north-west  of 
the  pumpkin  pie ! 

There  are  several  squares  here  which  are  pretty 
enough,  and  like  most  of  these  enclosures  in  the 
towns  of  the  United  States,  tastefully  laid  out  with 
trees,  shrubs  and  walks.  Independence  Square  we 
especially  visited  as  being  the  spot  on  which  the 
American  declaration  of  Independence  was  proclaimed. The  room  in  the  State  Hquse  hard  by, 
where  the  document  was  finally  agreed  upon  and 
signed  on  the  memorable  4th  of  July,  is  still  left  as  it 
was  in  every  respect,  as  a  memento  of  the  deed.  On 
leaving  the  State  House  we  proceeded  to  the  Fairmount  waterworks,  a  pleasant  drive  of  about  three 
miles  from  the  town.  The  water  (to  the  amount  of 
22,000,000  gallons)  is  kept  in  four  reservoirs  on  the 
top  of  a  mount  or  mound  of  earth  1 00  feet  high,  to 
which  it  is  raised  by  mechanical  power  from  the  river 
beneath.  The  reservoirs  are  surrounded  and  the 
mount  intersected  with  gravel  walks  and  paths, 
shaded  by  chesnut  trees  and  evergreen  shrubs,  forming a  cool  and  agreeable  promenade  in  summer 
weather,  and  the  eminence,  though  slight  in  itself,  is 
sufficient  to  afford  a  good  and  extensive  view  both  of 
town  and  country,  all  being  so  flat  for  many  miles 
round.  The  cost  of  these  works  came  to  450,000 
dollars,  about  90,OOOL ;  and  I  was  told  that  upwards 
of  a  hundred  miles  of  iron  piping  is  used  in  conveying the  water  from  the  Fairmount  to  and  through  all 
the  various  quarters  of  the  city.  The  Grirard  College, 
to  which  our  steps  were  now  directed,  is  a  large  stone 
building,  on  the  model  of  the  Parthenon  at  Athens, 
but  it  is  a  poor  imitation  of  the  original  in  point  of 
architecture.  The  object  of  the  institution  is  a  most 
praiseworthy  one.  A  large  sum  of  money — I  believe 
200,000  dollars— was  left  to  the  city  of  Philadelphia 
by  a  Frenchman  of  the  name  of  Grirard,  for  the  purpose of  building  a  college  for  the  education  of  orphan 
boys.  The  pupils  are  received  between  the  ages  of 
eight  and  eighteen.  We  were  shown  all  over  the 
building,  as  well  as  the  grounds  and  gardens,  which 
are  extensive  and  handsome.  The  officials  were  particularly civil  and  good-natured  in  replying  to  all  our 
questions.  The  organisation  of  the  establishment  is 
carried  on  in  the  most  liberal  and  generous  scale,  and 
in  the   way  of  learning,   the   students   are   taught 
everything  they  may  wish  to  know. 

There  is  much  in  the  domestic  manners  and  customs in  this  country  to  which  I  find  it  impossible  to 
reconcile  myself.  When  will  the  people  learn  that 
they  may  be  free  and  independent  yet  at  the  same 
time  neither  coarse  nor  vulgar  ?  An  incident  occurred 
to-day  at  dinner,  at  which  I  cannot  help  laughing, 
though  I  was  excessively  irritated.  Among  other  singularities to  which  I  cannot  subscribe,  is  that  of 
rushing  in  at  the  sound  of  the  dinner-bell,  like  so 
many  wild  beasts  going  to  feed ;  and  then  when  they 
are  there,  the  way  they  bolt  everything,  seize  everything, and  heap  everything  eatable  on  their  plates  at 
once,  as  if  they  feared  their  neighbours  would  annex 
their  share.  I  was  walking  at  my  usual  pace  along 
the  dinner  room,  about  two  minutes  after  the  bell  had 
ceased  ringing,  and  looking  for  my  seat,  when  suddenly two  hands  (from  behind)  were  placed  on  iny 
shoulders,  and  the  voice  of  a  waiter,  with  the  most 
shocking  twang,  thus  addressed  me : — "  Well,  Miss, 
I  calculate  if  you  want  victuals  you  had  better  go 
a-head!"  Altogether,  this  hotel  has  by  no  means 
tended  to  improve  my  impression  of  the  inhabitants 
of  this,  undeniably,  "  first-rate  "  country  (to  use  their 
own  favourite  expression).  At  night  we  had  another 
sample  of  their  equality,  and  for  the  first  time,  I  must 
observe  also,  I  found  a  want  of  the  usual  courtesy  to 
our  sex,  though  to  be  sure  the  offender  was  only  a 
boy.  On  reaching  our  bed-room  we  found  darkness 
instead  of  the  gas  we  expected,  and  we  had  omitted 
to  provide  or  indeed  think  of  bringing  a  light 
with  us.  We  rang  the  bell  and  asked  for  a  candle, 
when  our  waiter,  an  urchin  apparently  not  more 
than  thirteen  or  fourteen,  after  putting  his  arms  a-kimbo and  spitting  on  the  floor,  told  us  he  (t  guessed 
we  might  fetch  one  for  ourselves,  as  we  ought  to  have 
brought  one  up  with  us." 

We  leave  Philadelphia  to-morrow ;  and  as  I  find  my 
letter  has  already  expanded  itself  considerably,  I  will 
defer  to  my  next  our  journey  to  New  York. 

Always,  &c. 

C. 
