New  York,  August  22nd. —  My  dear  Father,  —  We 
quitted  Philadelphia  early  in  the  morning  of  the  20th, 
that  is,  the  day  before  yesterday,  a  short  railway 
journey  of  about  sixty  miles  brought  us  to  Amboy,  not 
a  very  interesting  route  ;  the  country  flat  and  sandy. 
The  only  object  of  note  we  passed  was  at  Bordentown, 
where  the  house  and  grounds  formerly  occupied  by 
Joseph  Buonaparte  were  pointed  out  to  us.  Amboy 
is  situated  at  the  extremity  of  a  creek  or  arm  of  the 
sea  running  inland.  Here  we  left  the  cars  and  embarked in  a  steamer.  It  is  pleasant  to  be  able  to 
praise  something ;  so  as  to  make  up  for  all  the 
wrath  and  indignation  poured  forth  in  my  last  letter 
to  you  about  Philadelphia.  I  must  frankly  allow 
that  the  first  view  of  New  York  far  surpasses  in 
splendour  any  town  in  the  world  I  have  yet  seen, 
and  of  those  the  number  is  not  small.  Everything 
which  constitutes  either  magnificence  or  beauty 
seems  united  here.  Sea  and  river,  mountain  and 
garden,  houses,  ships,  trees,  all  seem  to  vie  with  each 
other  in  adding  to  the  charm  of  this  matchless  scene, 
coloured  too  as  it  was  by  the  light  of  the  setting  sun. 
I  can  scarcely  imagine  anything  more  beautiful  than 
the  view  which  burst  upon  us  as  we  gradually  approached the  entrance  to  the  harbour.  The  channel 
narrowing  and  disclosing  Staten  Island  with  its  green 
trees  and  bright-hued  gardens  on  the  one  side,  and 
the  fine  suburb  of  New  Jersey,  apparently  itself 
a  city  of  palaces  on  the  other.  It  is  said  that  the 
united  navies  of  the  whole  world  would  have  room  to 
float  in  the  New  York  waters.  Whether  this  may  be 
an  exaggeration  or  not  I  am  not  competent  to  decide  ; 
but  the  idea  of  great  space  and  vastness  must  strike 
the  most  casual  observer.  Judging  from  the  impressions of  the  first  four-and-twenty  hours,  I  am  inclined 
to  give  this  the  preference  over  any  of  the  towns 
I  have  yet  visited  in  the  States.  It  is  bustling  and 
noisy  to  be  sure ;  still  it  is  cheerful,  and  I  should 
think  agreeable  as  a  residence.  The  far-famed  and 
world-renowned  "  Broadway,"  the  street  par  excellence of  New  York,  I  am  almost  afraid  to  mention. 
It  has  been  so  written  to  death  by  travellers  of  every 
kind,  still  it  is  unavoidable.  "  Broadway "  is  the 
"  Canebiere "  *  of  New  York.  As  far  as  I  can  see 
at  present,  all  the  shops,  or  stores,  as  they  call  them, 
in  the  town,  seem  to  be  accumulated  here ;  as  well 
as  the  greater  number  of  the  hotels.  These  last- 
mentioned  establishments  are  almost  the  distinctive 
feature  of  the  place.  Public  or  national  buildings,  so 
to  speak,  exist  in  very  small  numbers ;  but  the  hotels 
are  magnificent  beyond  all  conception, —  palaces 
indeed  they  may  be  rather  called,  both  in  size  and 
redundancy  of  ornament.  They  are  for  the  most  part 
built  either  of  pure  white  marble  or  of  a  reddish- 
brown  granite,  the  latter  in  my  opinion  especially 
beautiful.  Attached  to  Broadway  towards  the  higher 
part  of  it  are  several  very  fine  streets  consisting 
entirely  of  private  houses.  These  streets  are  mostly 
called  "  Avenues,"  and  are  numbered  "  4th,  5th," 
&c.  They  are  chiefly  inhabited  by  the  "  upper  ten 
thousand."  ....  The  place  of  our  disembarcation  on  Saturday  presents  a  curious  example 
of  the  different  purposes  to  which  things  in  this 
world  may  be  applied.  The  spot  is  named  indifferently, the  Battery  or  the  Castle  Gardens,  and  one 
of  its  uses  is  that  of  a  general  landing-place  for 
voyagers  coming  from  or  going  to  the  south.  Being 
well  laid  out  in  shady  walks,  planted  with  trees 
and  shrubs,  it  forms  a  pleasant  rendezvous  where 
you  may  meet  your  friends.  Indeed,  it  is  the  only 
thing  of  the  kind  in  New  York,  bearing  the  remotest 
resemblance  to  one  of  our  parks.  But  besides  all 
this,  there  is  something  else,  and  at  night  the  scene 
changes — into  what  should  you  guess  ?  No  less  an 
institution  than  the  Italian  Opera !  called,  for  the 
nonce,  the  Castle  Garden  Theatre.  The  ancient 
name  of  Castle  G-arden  was  Castle  Clinton,  erected 
as  one  of  the  defences  of  the  harbour ;  but  as  time 
went  on  and  new  and  more  efficient  fortifications 
were  built,  this  was  turned  to  the  pacific  purpose 
of  a  place  of  public  amusement;  and  finally,  as  I 
have  said,  it  is  now  used  as  the  Italian  Opera  House. 
Not  feeling  by  any  means  fatigued,  we  went  there 
on  the  evening  of  our  arrival.  The  interior  is  quite 
different  from  the  general  notion  one  entertains  of 
an  Opera  House.  There  are  no  boxes  at  all;  the 
world  sits  in  what  we  should  call  the  pit ;  ladies  wear 
bonnets,  and  gentlemen  what  they  please.  Sontag* 
is  the  prima  donna  at  present,  and  took  the  part  of 
Kosina  in  the  Barbiere ;  but  either  she  is  not  in 
good  voice,  or  else  she  is  saving  it.  Knowing  her 
style  so  well  as  I  do,  I  could  see  there  was  something not  right.  She  gave  the  impression  of  a 
person  humming  or  trying  over  a  song  before  proceeding to  perform  it  properly  ...  I  now  resume my  letter  after  a  relache  of  two  or  three  days, 
employed  chiefly  in  reading  your  budget  from 
England.  We  have  been  to  church,  and  also  to  a  place 
of  musical  entertainment  called  Christy's  Minstrels ; 
the   former   I   should   not   mention,    but   that   the 
Divine  Service  took   place  at  Trinity   Church,   the 
principal  and  handsomest  church,  not  only  in  New 
York,  but  I  believe  I  might  add  in  the  United  States, 
which  are  sadly   deficient   in   church   architecture. 
There  is  nothing  whatever  in  any  of  the  American 
churches,  I  have  seen,  either  to  please  the  eye  or 
ear.     This  Trinity  is  Orothic,  spacious,  and  possesses 
a  very  high  steeple  ;  but  I  think  that  is  all.     Christy's 
Minstrels  are  amusing  enough.     They  are  a  set  of 
apparently  black  men,  numbering  from  twelve    to 
fourteen  persons,  and  who  impersonate  the  "  darkies; " 
talk  as  they  talk,   sing  as  they  sing,  and  play  the 
banjo,  bones  and  other  instruments.     They  perform 
alternately  solos,  duets,  trios  and  choruses.     Some  of 
the  airs  are  exceedingly  melodious,  and  the  words 
adapted  to  them  quite  pathetic.     Two  especially  I 
noted  are  most  touching  called  "  Old  Dog  Tray,"  and 
"  My  old  Kentucky  Home,  (rood  Night."  We  went  this 
afternoon  to  dine  with  Mr.  K.  the  banker,  to  whom 
I  had  a  letter  of  introduction.     His  country  residence is  at  Hoboken,  a  suburb  of  New  York  about 
five  miles  off.     The  scenery  on  the  way  was  beautiful  and   moreover  quite   wild.     It   is   difficult  to 
believe  that  so  large  a  city  is  close  at  hand,  one 
might  fancy  oneself  hundreds  of  miles  afar  in  the 
backwoods,  so  still  and  silent.     We  dined  with  Mrs. 
K.'s  family.     They  have  a  pretty  house  and  grounds, 
with  a  magnificent  view  from  their  garden,  of  New 
York  in  the  distance,  and  the  Hudson  flowing  at 
their  feet.  Mrs.  K.  and  the  daughters  are  hospitable, amiable  people,  with  lovely  faces  like  all  American women. 

N.B.  —  The  driver  missed  his  way  in  returning, 
and  we  did  not  get  back  till  late. 