August  25th.  —  Set  out  last  evening  by  the  light  of 
a  bright  moon,  en  route  to  Niagara.  The  railroad  for 
some  distance  was  along  the  banks  of  the  Hudson, 
which  are  very  beautiful  by  day  and  may  be  called 
romantic  by  night.  I  intend,  if  all  be  well,  to 
return  to  New  York  by  boat  on  the  river,  and  thus 
to  see  the  beauties  of  the  road  by'  land  and  water. 
Reached  Niagara  early  this  morning  and  proceeded 
immediately  across  the  river  to  the  Clifton  House 
on  the  Canadian  side.  The  view  of  the  falls  being 
better  in  every  respect  here  than  on  the  American 
shore.  I  know  it  is  the  fashion  with  most  people 
to  go  almost  out  of  their  senses  on  the  first  view 
of  the  Niagara,  or  at  the  very  least  to  be  rendered 
speechless,  entranced,  and  what  not  at  the  first  introduction to  the  falls.  I  regret  to  be  obliged  to 
confess  that  no  such  violent  effect  has  been  produced on  my  hardened  nerves,  and  yet  I  do  think 
them  glorious,  and  though  not  astonished,  on  the  other 
hand,  I  am  not  disappointed.  There  is  one  peculiarity 
in  these  falls  which  is  unaccountable,  that  is,  that 
barring  the  noise,  you  can  form  a  perfectly  correct 
estimate  of  the  appearance  of  them  from  pictures, 
even  indifferent  ones.  This  is  very  singular,  as 
generally  speaking,  falling  water  is  precisely  the 
thing  painting  can  rarely  render  natural,  yet  in  this 
instance  there  is  an  exception.  The  American  Falls 
are  just  opposite  my  windows,  the  larger  one,  called 
.the  Horse-shoe,  a  little  further  on  in  the  distance. 
Took  a  short  walk  to  the  far-famed  Table-rock  in 
the  afternoon,  from  the  brink  of  which  the  Horseshoe Fall  is  seen  in  all  its  splendour. 

29th. — Crossed  to  the  American  side  by  a  suspension 
bridge  (something  like  the  one  at  Friburg,  but  not 
so  fine),  and  went  to  Groat  Island,  whence  we  saw 
the  rapids  to  perfection.  Then,  after  some  considerable clambering  and  climbing,  slipping  and 
sliding,  we  made  our  way  down  nearly  underneath 
the  American  Fall.  We  were  speedily  enveloped  in 
the  mist  and  spray,  and,  as  may  be  supposed,  nearly 
deafened  by  the  roar.  Having  sufficiently  gazed 
from  below,  we  proceeded  to  re-ascend  our  difficult 
path.  At  length  we  reached  the  summit,  and  then 
drove  along  the  shore  to  the  rapids.  A  little  round 
tower  like  a  lighthouse  has  been  constructed  in  the 
middle  of  the  river,  and  is  approached  by  means  of  a 
bridge  made  of  the  trunks  of  trees.  The  tower  is  built 
as  near  as  safety  will  allow  to  the  edge  of  the  cataract. 

30th. — Embarked  this  morning  in  a  steamer  bearing the  romantic  name  of  The  Maid  of  the  Mist. 
Her  travelling  experiences  have  been  few,  as  she  was 
built  on  the  spot.  She  takes  the  same  short  voyage 
three  times  every  day,  and  is  moored  for  the  night  at 
the  place  of  her  birth.  She  goes  bravely  through 
her  task  notwithstanding ;  passing  under  and  through 
the  torrent  and  mist  of  the  American  Falls,  and  as 
close  as  prudence  permits  to  the  Horse-shoe,  which  is 
by  no  means  so  placable  as  its  neighbour,  and 
obliges  one  to  keep  at  a  very  respectful  distance. 
What  has  charmed  me  most  in  our  excursion  to-day 
has  been  the  number  and  variety  of  rainbows  :  of  all 
hues  and  in  every  conceivable  spot  near  the  falls; 
now  arching  over  them,  now  dipping  under  them, 
now  shooting  across,  and  occasionally  forming  a  com- 
plete circle.  Spent  the  rest  of  the  morning  in  Groat 
Island,  a  delightful  lounging-place,  with  every  charm 
that  nature  can  give  around  you.  I  should  not 
greatly  object  to  pitching  my  tent  permanently  at 
Niagara.  We  reserve  for  this  afternoon  the  bouquet 
of  our  Niagara  expedition,  if  such  a  term  may  be 
used,  applied  to  water  as  well  as  fire-works.  It  consists in  what  is  called  going  under  the  Horse-shoe  Fall. 
Having  been  ushered  into  a  small  dressing-room,  we 
were  provided  with  the  costume  de  rigueur  on  such 
occasions :  a  pair  of  drawers  and  stockings  of  flannel, 
then  a  pair  oftrowsers  and  a  dress  of  bloomer  fashion, 
descending  only  to  the  knees,  both  made  of  india- 
rubber,  and  lastly,  a  covering  for  the  head  of  an  indescribable shape,  something  between  a  quakeress's 
bonnet  and  a  helmet.     Thus  elegantly  equipped  we 
started,  accompanied  by  four  guides.      Presently  we 
came  to  a  sort  of  shelf  or  ledge  cut  out  of  the  rock,  a 
most  slippery  place,  and  it  was  with  great  difficulty 
we  could  keep  our  footing.     Along  this  we  proceeded 
for  some  hundred   yards  or   thereabouts,   until   we 
found   ourselves  completely  underneath,  and  in  the 
hollow  of  the  arch  formed  by  the  leap  of  the  immense body  of  water  from  the  rock  above  us.     The 
scene  here  was  terrific,  and  rather  calculated  to  shake 
one's  courage.  The  noise  was  awful !  added  to  which, 
the  blinding  spray  from  the  whirlpool  boiling  and 
foaming  below  quite  frustrated  any  attempt  at  using 
our  eyes,  besides  finding  it  very  difficult  to  preserve 
our  equilibrium.     At  length  we  emerged  in  safety,  but 
drenched   to   the  skin,    notwithstanding   our  india- 
rubber  preservatives.  • 

3lst. — A  comparatively  idle  morning  passed  in 
my  favourite  nook  on  Groat  Island.  One  might 
dream  away  one's  existence  very  pleasantly  here. 
The  hand  of  man  has  fortunately  left  nature  alone 
in  her,  grandeur.  The  fine  forest  spreads  its  dark 
masses  far  and  wide  undisturbed,  and  above  all  unimproved by  mortal  touch.  The  stillness  which 
perhaps  might  otherwise  be  oppressive,  being  broken 
by  the  roar  of  the  falling  water,  and  the  fluttering  of 
innumerable  birds  of  a  most  brilliant  orange  colour, 
who  appear  to  have  chosen  this  spot  as  their  home. 
As  we  were  slowly  wending  our  way  back  to  the  Clifton House,  we  found  ourselves  in  the  midst  of  a  very 
unexpected  scene  of  excitement.  A  slave  had  escaped 
from  the  American  side  of  the  Niagara,  and  had 
already  swum  nearly  half-way  across ;  his  pursuers 
were  frantically  pushing  off  a  boat;  the  suspense 
then  became  painful,  I  have  hardly  yet  recovered  my 
breath ;  but  it  was  all  right  at  last,  though  a  narrow 
escape — the  fugitive  gained  the  Canadian  shore,  and 
he  was  safe.  I  could  not  find  out  whether  he  had  been 
guilty  of  anything  more  than  running  away.  Very 
probably  he  had,  and  I  have  not  the  slightest  doubt 
he  deserved  to  have  been  caught ;  still  my  sympathies 
are  always  with  the  hunted  and  not  with  the  hunters, 
under  any  circumstances.  After  dinner  we  took  a 
drive  to  the  village  of  Chipewa,  an  Indian  settlement 
on  the  banks  of  the  Niagara  Eiver,  and  also  the  scene 
of  one  of  the  many  fights  between  the  Americans  and 
ourselves  during  the  war.  It  is  now  a  quiet  thriving 
little  place,  where  the  Indians  bring  the  specimens  of 
their  handiwork  for  exhibition  and  sale  to  the  numerous visitors  constantly  passing  to  and  fro.  We 
made  several  purchases  of  them.  Their  embroidery 
is  exceedingly  pretty :  shoes,  card-cases,  boxes  made 
of  the  skin  and  worked  with  the  hair  of  the  Moose- 
deer,  ingeniously  dyed  to  the  required  tints  of  the 
flowers  or  fruit  it  is  worked  to  represent.  Also  they 
make  fans,  screens,  and  other  ornaments  of  eagles' 
feathers  in  a  most  admirable  manner. 