September  2nd. — We  are  once  more  on  the  waste 
of  waters  :  out  of  sight  of  land,  somewhere  about  the 
middle  of  Lake  Ontario ;  so  before  we  leave  the 
steamer,  which  we  expect  to  do  to-night,  and  consequently will  have  fresh  matter  to  relate,  I  will  take 
up  the  thread  of  my  narrative  from  the  time  of 
leaving  Niagara.  You  will  have  observed  that  while 
there  I  adopted  the  diary  form,  wishing  to  note  down 
the  impressions  of  the  moment.  We  took  our  departure from  the  Clifton  House  yesterday  morning. 
A  drive  of  eight  miles  on  a  tram-road  brought  us  to 
Queenstown,  where  we  crossed  the  Niagara  by  means 
of  the  suspension  bridge,  to  Lewiston.  This  bridge  is 
said  to  be  the  largest  in  the  world,  but  it  does  not 
appear  to  me  to  be  so  wide  nor  so  high  as  that  at 
Friburg;  its  length  is  1040  feet.  From  the  heights 
above  this  town  a  most  charming  view  is  obtained  of 
the  valley  of  Niagara  and  Lake  Ontario.  Here,  too, 
there  was  a  very  sanguinary  engagement,  in  1812, 
between  the  United  States  and  British  forces,  in 
which  the  English  General,  Brock,  was  killed.  A 
column  has  been  erected  to  his  memory,  but  some 
years  ago  it  was  blown  up  in  the  middle  of  the  night 
by  some  envious  American.  A  good  deal  of  it  was 
destroyed,  and  it  looks  now  in  a  very  shattered  condition. Some  years  ago  there  was  an  attempt  made 
to  restore  it,  but  this  has  been  abandoned. — Apropos of  envy  and  jealousy,  I  forgot  to  mention  that 
while  at  Niagara  Falls,  during  one  of  our  excursions, 
the  spot  was  shown  to  us  where,  according  to  our 
guide,  one  of  the  "  decisive  battles  of  the  world  "  was 
fought,  and  at  which  I  need  not  say  the  English  were 
entirely  defeated. — Lundy's  Lane  was  the  name  of 
the  battle-field.  After  a  short  delay  at  Lewiston  we 
embarked  on  one  of  the  largest  and  most  magnificent 
steam-boats  imaginable  (whence  I  am  now  writing). 
It  resembles  a  floating  castle  more  than  a  ship,  with 
highly  ornamented  saloons  and  cabins  built  on  deck; 
the  roofs  of  these  again  being  carpeted  so  as  to  form 
a  place  for  walking;  the  whole  surmounted  by  an 
awning  during  the  sunshiny  hours.  A  little  before 
sunset  we  reached  Toronto.  Here  we  remained  some 
hours,  but  not  having  any  introductions  to  any  of  the 
inhabitants,  I  did  not  think  it  worth  while  to  land,  so 
contented  myself  with  its  external  appearance,  which 
is  very  handsome :  houses  and  streets  are  large  and 
well-built.  I  am  told  its  population  has  exactly 
doubled  itself  in  the  past  ten  years I 
have  just  met  with  a  curious  interruption,  which  I 
will  relate  whilst  the  recollection  of  it  is  fresh  on  my 
mind.  A  party  of  young  girls,  numbering  about  six 
or  seven,  walked  up  to  the  table  at  which  I  am  writing, and  after  a  moment's  pause  thus  addressed  me, 
"  Miss  !  Tell  me  now,  where  were  you  educated  ?" 
I  certainly  have  seldom  been  more  taken  aback  than 
at  this  sudden  query,  for  I  feared  I  had  unintentionally offended  some  one,  though  in  what  way  I  was 
totally  ignorant.  However,  I  thought  the  simple  truth 
would  be  the  best  reply,  so  I  answered,  "  Partly  in 
England,  partly  in  France."  The  riddle  was  now 
soon  solved  :  it  appears  that  when  we  first  came  on 
board  yesterday,  they  heard  Eleanor  and  me  talking 
French  together,  as  we  very  frequently  do,  consequently we  were  set  down  as  French  ;  but  this  morning, on  finding  us  equally  familiar  with  the  English 
tongue,  they  determined  to  resolve  their  doubts  then 
and  there,  and  so  took  this  singular  method  of  doing 
so.  We  have  now  had  a  very  amicable  conversation, 
and  have  given  each  other  some  mutual  information 
about  the  manners  and  customs  of  our  respective 
countries.  They  are  travelling  in  a  party  of  eight,  and 
are  about  to  make  a  vacation  tour  in  Canada.  Though 
to  us  it  seems  strange,  it  is  quite  a  common  practice 
here  for  a  lot  of  school  girls  to  join  together  on  the 
breaking  up  of  the  colleges  and  schools,  and  make  a 
summer  holiday  trip  wherever  they  may  feel  inclined, 
and  unchaperoned  by  fathers,  mothers,  or  governesses. 
Last  night,  towards  twelve  o'clock,  there  appeared  a 
very  beautiful  aurora  borealis,  which  illuminated  the 
heavens  in  a  wondrous  manner.  We  are  just  now 
arriving  at  Kingston,  where  I  believe  there  will  be  a 
change  of  steam-boats  :  the  colossal  affair  we  are  now 
in  not  being  adapted  to  some  of  the  narrow  channels 
through  which  we  shall  have  to  thread  to-morrow. 
So  adieu  for  the  present :  my  next  will  probably  be 

from  Montreal. 

Always  your  affectionate 

C. 

Since  writing  the  above  I  find  we  are  to  anchor 
hefe  for  the  night,  and  take  the  other  steamer  to- 
morrow: plenty  of  daylight  being  necessary  during 
the  passage  of  the  St.  Lawrence. 


RIVER   ST.   LAWRENCE —THOUSAND   ISLES. 
